- (317) Some spaces can have a dual function. For example, an airport is generally considered a publicly accessible space as regards its common areas, but the area dedicated to border control (where the customs officials stand and passports or ID checks occur) is excluded from the scope of the prohibition.
- (318) As clarified in Recital 19 AI Act, assessing whether a space is accessible to the public should be done based on a case-by-case analysis.
## . For law enforcement purposes
- (319) The prohibition in Article 5(1)(h) AI Act applies to the use of RBI systems for law enforcement purposes, irrespective of the entity, authority, or body carrying out the law enforcement activities.
- (320) Law enforcement is defined in Article 3(46) AI Act as the 'activities carried out by law enforcement authorities or on their behalf for the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution  of  criminal  offences  or  the  execution  of  criminal  penalties,  including safeguarding against and preventing threats to public security.' These purposes are the same as those listed in Article 1 LED. 196 Thus, any interpretation of those purposes in relation to LED may also be relevant for the purpose of interpreting the notion of ' law enforcement' used in the AI Act.
- (321) Law enforcement purposes comprise the investigation, detection, and prosecution of criminal offences. They also comprise activities in relation to the prevention of criminal offences, including safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security, before  any  crime  has  actually  been  committed.  For  instance,  the  police  may  take 'coercive measures at demonstrations, major sporting events or riots' in the context of crime prevention. 197 Finally, those activities comprise the execution of penalties, such as the execution of sentences.
- (322) According to Article 3(46) AI Act, law enforcement activities may be performed by law enforcement authorities or on their behalf. Law enforcement authorities are further defined in Article 3(45) AI Act in the same manner as national competent authorities are  defined  in  the  LED. 198 That  definition  covers  law  enforcement  authorities  and entrusted bodies or entities (which may be private parties):
- (a) any public authority competent for the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security; or
196 Some activities of law enforcement authorities are excluded from the scope of the LED, such as when they perform administrative tasks (such as human resources), these activities are carried outside the law enforcement framework. They fall under the GDPR.  See Recital 19 GDPR.
197
Recital 12 LED.
198
Article 3(7) LED.
For example, such public authorities include police authorities and criminal justice authorities (such as prosecutors) when they carry out a law enforcement task.
- (b) any other body or entity entrusted by Member State law to exercise public authority and public powers for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security;
(323) Under the  AI  Act  other  entities,  bodies,  or  persons,  may  exercise  law  enforcement activities after being entrusted by Member States law entrusting them public authority and public powers for the purposes listed above.
(324) 'On behalf of' means that a law enforcement authority has delegated the performance of a law enforcement activity (or part of it) to another entity or person, including private parties, or has requested in specific cases another entity or person to act to support law enforcement activities. In both cases, the law enforcement authorities must instruct on all major aspects and supervise the other entity, as this requirement is inherent to the notion of acting 'on behalf' of a person.
Delegation of tasks to other bodies may include, for example,
- -Public transport companies requested by law enforcement authorities to ensure security on the public transport networks under their instructions and supervision.
- -Sports federations requested by law enforcement authorities to act under their instructions and supervision to provide security at sporting events.
- -Banks that are requested by law enforcement authorities to conduct certain actions to 'counter certain crimes in specific cases' under the instructions and supervision of law enforcement authorities.
These activities fall within the definition of 'for the purpose of law enforcement' since those entities act 'on behalf' of law enforcement authorities. If those entities act on their 'own behalf' when detecting and countering crimes (such as fraud, money laundering), they will not be considered to fall under the prohibition of Article 5(1)(h) AI Act.
(325) Only  when  those  other  bodies  or  entities  have  been  entrusted  with  a  specific  law enforcement task will their activities fall under the definition of 'law enforcement'.
## . Exceptions to the prohibition
(326) The AI Act provides three exceptions to the general prohibition on the use of real-time RBI in publicly accessible spaces for law enforcement purposes. Article 5(1)(h)(i) to (iii)  AI  Act  exhaustively  lists  three  objectives  for  which  real-time  RBI  may  be
authorised, while Article 5(2) to 5(7) AI Act lays down the conditions and safeguards for such authorisation. Article 5(1)(h)(i)-(iii) AI Act does not in itself constitute a legal basis for the real-time use of RBI systems in publicly accessible spaces. Rather, only a domestic Member State law that fulfils, in particular, the requirements in Article 5(2)(7)  AI  Act  can  allow the use of  real-time RBI,  as provided by Article 5(2)  AI Act. Consequently, in the absence of Member State legislation authorising the use of realtime RBI for one or more of those objectives, such use is prohibited as from 2 February 2025.
## . Rationale and objectives
- (327) The objectives set out in Article 5(1)(h)(i)-(iii) AI Act aim to allow the use of certain AI and investigative tools for law enforcement purposes.  These objectives are:
- (i) the targeted search of victims of three specific serious crimes and missing persons [protection];
- (ii) the prevention of imminent threats to life or physical safety or a genuine threat of terrorist attacks [prevention]; and
- (iii)  the  localisation  and  identification  of  suspects  and  offenders  of  certain serious crimes as listed in Annex II [prosecution/investigation].
(328) In  those  scenarios,  the  Union  legislature  has  balanced  the  security  needs  of  society against the risk that real-time RBI systems pose to the fundamental rights of individuals subject to those systems. According to Recital 33 AI Act, the objectives for which the use  of  real-time  RBI  systems  for  law  enforcement  purposes  in  publicly  accessible spaces is allowed must be strictly, exhaustively, and narrowly defined, and appear when there is a 'strict necessity' to achieve 'a substantial public interest' which 'outweighs the  risks'  posed  to  fundamental  rights.  Any  other  use  of  real-time  RBI  systems  in publicly accessible spaces for law enforcement purposes which is not listed in Article 5(1)(i)-(iii) AI Act is prohibited.
For instance, the use of real-time RBI systems by the police to identify a shoplifter and compare their facial images against criminal databases is prohibited, as it does not fall under any of the objectives listed in Article 5(1)(h)(i)-(iii) AI Act.
## . Targeted search for  the victims of three serious crimes and missing persons
(329) According to Article 5(1)(h)(i) AI Act, the use of real-time RBI in publicly accessible spaces  for  law  enforcement  purposes  is  allowed,  subject  to  strict  necessity  and  the conditions in Article 5(2)-(7) AI Act, for the targeted search of victims of abduction, trafficking  in  human  beings,  or  sexual  exploitation  of  human  beings,  as well  as  the search for missing persons.
## a) Targeted search for victims of three types of crimes
(330) The scenario described in  Article 5(1)(h)(i)  AI  Act  seeks  to  assist  law  enforcement authorities to search for victims of three serious crimes.
- (331) A targeted search would involve the localisation and identification of victims.
Three types of crimes
(332) The  targeted  search  for  specific  victims  of  three  serious  crimes  are  covered  by  the scenario listed in Article 5(1)(h)(i) AI Act: the abduction of, trafficking in, and sexual exploitation of human beings 199 .
- If,  for  example,  a  child  is  kidnapped  and  there  are  concrete  indications  that  the kidnapper intends to bring the child from one place to another by car, the police may use a real-time RBI system for the targeted search of that child, but it must define a perimeter of deployment and duration of use to identify the child.
## b) Searching for missing persons
(333) The first scenario also covers the search for a missing person. 200
- (334) A distinction  may  be  made  between  missing  children  and  missing  adults,  since  the voluntary  disappearance  of  a  missing  adult  will  not  always  trigger  a  search.  The applicable rules regarding missing children vary considerably from one Member State to another. 201 In any event, Article 5(1)(h)(i) AI Act only allows the use of a real-time RBI system to search for missing persons for law enforcement purposes.
(335) The disappearance of an adult does not always lead to a search of that person by police, as adults have the right to disappear. A search could be linked to the legal status of the person ('under curatorship'), their health condition (a mental illness), the existence of a suicidal note, but also the departure without personal belongings. If the circumstances of the disappearance are a cause for concern, the disappearance may be filed with the police so that a search can start.
(336) In  some  Member  States,  the  search  for  a  missing  person  may  occur  under  an administrative procedure and not for law enforcement purposes. For example, where a vulnerable person is missing, but there is no suspicion of a crime or  any other law enforcement purpose, the use of real-time RBI systems to search for that person would
199 Kidnapping, trafficking in human beings, and sexual exploitation are three crimes that can trigger a European Arrest Warrant (EAW) to arrest and transfer a criminal suspect or a sentenced person to the country that issued the EAW. The three crimes relate mostly but not exclusively to women and children. According to the European Commission's DG Migration and Home Affairs, almost 40 percent of the victims are EU citizens, and most of them are women and children trafficked for sexual exploitation. The number of men victims has nearly doubled in ten years. They are trafficked for forced labour and forced begging, while most of the women and children are trafficked for sexual exploitation. https://home-affairs.ec.europa.eu/policies/internal-security/organised-crime-and-human-trafficking/together-against-traffickinghuman-beings\_en
200 A  'missing person'  is not defined at EU level. 