See also CJEU, judgment of 5 June 2012, Bonda, Case C-489/10, EU:C:2012:319, paragraphs 37ff.; CJEU, judgment of 26 February 2013, Åkerberg Fransson, Case C-617/10, EU:C:2013:105, paragraph 35.
144 The presumption of innocence is a fundamental right enshrined in Article 48 of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights.
145 As specified by the CJEU, it is not required that this person is made aware of their status as suspect/accused persons by the competent authorities for the Directive to apply.
## 6. ARTICLE 5(1)(E) AI ACT - UNTARGETED SCRAPING OF FACIAL IMAGES
(222) Article 5(1)(e) AI Act prohibits the placing on the market, putting into service for this specific  purpose,  or  the  use  of  AI  systems  that  create  or  expand  facial  recognition databases through the untargeted scraping of facial images from the Internet or CCTV footage.
## . Rationale and objectives
(223) The untargeted scraping of facial images from the internet and from CCTV footage seriously interferes  with individuals' rights to privacy and data protection and deny those individuals the right to remain anonymous. Recital 43 AI Act therefore justifies the  prohibition  established  in  Article  5(1)(e)  AI  Act  based  on  the  'feeling  of  mass surveillance' and the risks of 'gross violations of fundamental rights, including the right to privacy'.
## . Main concepts and components of the prohibition
## Article 5(1)(e) AI Act provides
The following AI practices shall be prohibited:
(e) the placing on the market, the putting into service for this specific purpose, or the use  of  AI  systems  that  create  or  expand  facial  recognition  databases  through  the untargeted scraping of facial images from the internet or CCTV footage;
Several cumulative conditions must be fulfilled for the prohibition in Article 5(1)(e) AI
(224) Act to apply:
- (i) The practice must constitute the 'placing on the market', 'the putting into service for this specific purpose' or the 'use' of an AI system;
- (ii) for the purpose of creating or expanding facial recognition databases;
- (iii) the means to populate the database are through AI tools for untargeted scraping; and
- (iv) the sources of the images are either from the internet or CCTV footage.
(225) For the prohibition to apply all four conditions must be simultaneously fulfilled. The first element of placing on the market, putting into service or use of the AI system has been  already  analysed  in  section  .  The  prohibition,  therefore,  applies  to  both providers and deployers of AI systems, each within their respective responsibilities, not to place on the market, put into service or use such AI systems. The specific criteria related  to  the  prohibition  of  untargeted  scraping  are  further  described  and  analysed below. The prohibition applies to scraping tools that are placed on the market or being put into service '' for this specific purpose' of untargeted scraping of facial images from the internet or CCTV footage. This implies that the prohibition does not apply to any
scraping  tool  with  which  a  database  for  face  recognition  may  be  constructed  or expanded, but only to tools for untargeted scraping.
## . Facial recognition databases
(226) The prohibition in Article 5(1)(e) AI Act covers AI systems used to create or expand facial recognition databases. 'Database' in this context should be understood to refer to any collection of data, or information, that is specially organized for rapid search and retrieval by a computer. A facial recognition database is capable of matching a human face from a digital image or video frame against a database of faces, comparing it to images in the database and determining whether there is a likely match between the two. Such a facial recognition database may be temporary, centralised or decentralised. Article 5(1)(e) does not require that the sole purpose of the database is to be used for facial recognition; it is sufficient that the database can be used for facial recognition.
## . Through untargeted scraping of facial images
- (227) 'Scraping' typically refers to using web crawlers, bots, or other means to extract data or  content  from  different  sources,  including  CCTV,  websites  or  social  media, automatically.  These  tools  are  software ' programmed  to  sift  through  databases  and extract information and to make use of that information for another purpose.
- (228) 'Untargeted' relates to a technique that operates like a 'vacuum cleaner', absorbing as much data and information as possible, without targeting specifically and individually intended subject(s) of the scarping. Scraping indiscriminately harvests data or content. Thus, the notion of 'untargeted' means without a specific focus on a given individual or group of individuals. The respect of opt-out of internet protocols such as robot.txt does not affect the untargeted nature of the scraping.
- (229) If a scraping tool is instructed to collect images or video containing human faces only of specific individuals or a pre-defined group of persons, then the scraping becomes targeted, for example to find one specific criminal or to identify a group of victims. Such scraping is not covered by the prohibition in Article 5(1)(e) AI Act.
- (230) For example, the targeted collection of images focusing on a class of victims, by using crawlers to pick up on images of victims that human traffickers post/advertise on social media  channels,  is  not  covered  by  the  prohibition.  Untargeted  scraping  should  be interpreted  in  a  manner  that  does  not  allow  circumvention  of  the  prohibition.  The scraping of the Internet or CCTV footage for the creation of a database step-by-step, thereby selecting specific groups of individuals or other criteria each time, should fall within the prohibition of Article 5(1)(e) AI Act where the end-result is functionally the same as pursuing untargeted scraping from the outset.
- (231) Where  systems  combine  targeted  searches  for  images  or  videos  with  untargeted searches, the untargeted scraping is prohibited.
## . From the Internet and CCTV footage
(232) For the prohibition in Article 5(1)(e) AI Act to apply, the source of the facial images may either be the Internet or CCTV footage. Regarding the internet, the fact that a person has published facial images of themselves on a social media platform does not mean that that person has given his or her consent for those images to be included in a facial recognition database. Examples of scraping facial images from CCTV footage include images acquired by surveillance cameras operated in places such as airports, streets, parks, etc.
## Example:
A facial recognition software company collects pictures of faces. The photographs held by  the  company  have  been  scraped  from  social  media  (e.g.  Facebook,  YouTube, Twitter,  Venmo)  with  an  'automated  image  scraper'  that  searches  the  internet  and detects images containing human faces. It collects those images with any associated information  (such  as  the  source  of  the  image  (URL),  the  geo-localisation,  and sometimes the names of the individuals). The facial features are then extracted from the images  and  transformed  into  mathematical  representations,  which  are  hashed  for indexation and future comparison.  