- ( 10 ) Council Directive 85/374/EEC of 25 July 1985 on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning liability  for  defective  products  (OJ  L  210,  ,  p.  29).
- ( 11 ) Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation)  (OJ  L  119,  ,  p.  1).
- ( 12 ) Regulation  (EU)  2018/1725  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  23  October  2018  on  the  protection  of  natural persons  with  regard  to  the  processing  of  personal  data  by  the  Union  institutions,  bodies,  offices  and  agencies  and  on  the  free movement of such data, and repealing Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 and Decision No 1247/2002/EC (OJ L 295, , p. 39).
- ( 13 ) Directive (EU) 2016/680 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard  to  the  processing  of  personal  data  by competent  authorities  for  the  purposes  of  the  prevention,  investigation,  detection or prosecution  of  criminal  offences  or  the  execution  of  criminal  penalties,  and  on  the  free  movement  of  such  data,  and  repealing Council Framework Decision 2008/977/JHA (OJ L 119, , p. 89).
- ( 14 ) Directive 2002/58/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 July 2002 concerning the processing of personal data and  the  protection  of  privacy  in  the  electronic  communications  sector  (Directive  on  privacy  and  electronic  communications)  (OJ L  201,  ,  p.  37).
- rights and guarantees awarded to them by such Union law, including the rights related to solely automated individual decision-making, including profiling. Harmonised rules for  the placing on the market, the putting into service and the use of AI systems established under this Regulation should facilitate the effective implementation and enable the exercise of  the data  subjects'  rights  and  other  remedies  guaranteed under Union law on the protection of personal data  and  of other  fundamental  rights.
- (11) This  Regulation  should  be  without  prejudice  to  the  provisions  regarding  the  liability  of  providers  of  intermediary services  as  set  out  in  Regulation  (EU)  2022/2065  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council ( 15 ).
- (12) The notion of 'AI system' in this Regulation should be clearly defined and should be closely aligned with the work of international  organisations  working  on  AI  to  ensure  legal  certainty,  facilitate  international  convergence  and  wide acceptance,  while  providing  the  flexibility  to  accommodate  the  rapid  technological  developments  in  this  field. Moreover,  the  definition  should  be  based  on  key  characteristics  of  AI  systems  that  distinguish  it  from  simpler traditional software systems or programming approaches and should not cover systems that are based on the rules defined  solely  by  natural  persons  to  automatically  execute  operations.  A  key  characteristic  of  AI  systems  is  their capability to infer. This capability to infer refers to the process of obtaining the outputs, such as predictions, content, recommendations,  or  decisions,  which  can  influence  physical  and  virtual  environments,  and  to  a  capability  of  AI systems  to  derive  models  or  algorithms,  or  both,  from  inputs  or  data.  The  techniques  that  enable  inference  while building an AI system include machine learning approaches that learn from data how to achieve certain objectives, and logic- and knowledge-based approaches that infer from encoded knowledge or symbolic representation of  the task  to  be  solved.  The  capacity  of  an  AI  system  to  infer  transcends  basic  data  processing  by  enabling  learning, reasoning or modelling. The term 'machine-based' refers to the fact that AI systems run on machines. The reference to explicit or implicit objectives underscores that AI systems can operate according to explicit defined objectives or to implicit objectives. The objectives of the AI system may be different from the intended purpose of the AI system in a specific context. For the purposes of this Regulation, environments should be understood to be the contexts in which the AI systems operate, whereas outputs generated by the AI system reflect different functions performed by AI systems and include predictions, content, recommendations or decisions. 