- 2. Member  States  shall  communicate  to  the  Commission  the  identity  of  the  notifying  authorities  and  the  market surveillance authorities and the tasks of  those authorities, as well as any subsequent changes thereto. Member States shall make publicly available information on how competent authorities and single points of contact can be contacted, through electronic communication means by 2 August 2025. Member States shall designate a market surveillance authority to act as the single point of contact for this Regulation, and shall notify the Commission of the identity of the single point of contact. The Commission shall make a list of  the single points  of  contact  publicly  available.
- 3. Member States shall ensure that their  national competent authorities are provided with adequate technical, financial and human resources, and with infrastructure to fulfil their tasks effectively under this Regulation. In particular, the national competent authorities shall have a sufficient number of personnel permanently available whose competences and expertise shall include an  in-depth  understanding  of AI technologies, data and  data computing,  personal  data  protection, cybersecurity,  fundamental  rights,  health  and  safety  risks  and  knowledge  of  existing  standards  and  legal  requirements. Member States shall assess and, if necessary, update competence and resource requirements referred to in this paragraph on an  annual  basis.
- 4. National  competent  authorities  shall  take  appropriate  measures  to  ensure  an  adequate  level  of  cybersecurity.
- 5. When  performing  their  tasks,  the  national  competent  authorities  shall  act  in  accordance  with  the  confidentiality obligations  set  out  in  Article  78.
- 6. By 2 August 2025, and once every two years thereafter, Member States shall report to the Commission on the status of  the  financial  and  human  resources  of  the  national  competent  authorities,  with  an  assessment  of  their  adequacy.  The Commission shall transmit  that information to the  Board for  discussion  and  possible  recommendations.
- 7. The Commission shall facilitate the exchange  of experience  between  national  competent  authorities.
- 8. National  competent  authorities  may  provide  guidance  and  advice  on  the  implementation  of  this  Regulation,  in particular  to SMEs including start-ups, taking into account the guidance and advice of the Board and the Commission, as appropriate. Whenever national competent authorities intend to provide guidance and advice with regard to an AI system in  areas  covered  by  other  Union  law,  the  national  competent  authorities  under  that  Union  law  shall  be  consulted,  as appropriate.
- 9. Where  Union  institutions,  bodies,  offices  or  agencies  fall  within  the  scope  of  this  Regulation,  the  European  Data Protection Supervisor  shall  act  as  the  competent  authority  for  their  supervision.
## CHAPTER VIII
## EU DATABASE FOR HIGH-RISK AI SYSTEMS
## Article  71
## EU database for high-risk AI systems listed  in Annex III
- 1. The  Commission  shall,  in  collaboration  with  the  Member  States,  set  up  and  maintain  an  EU  database  containing information  referred  to  in  paragraphs  2  and  3  of  this  Article  concerning  high-risk  AI  systems  referred  to  in  Article  6(2) which are registered in accordance with Articles 49 and 60 and AI systems that are not considered as high-risk pursuant to Article  6(3)  and  which  are  registered  in  accordance  with  Article  6(4)  and  Article  49.  When  setting  the  functional specifications  of  such  database,  the  Commission  shall  consult  the  relevant  experts,  and  when  updating  the  functional specifications  of  such  database,  the  Commission  shall  consult  the  Board.
- 2. The  data  listed  in  Sections  A  and  B  of  Annex  VIII  shall  be  entered  into  the  EU  database  by  the  provider  or,  where applicable,  by  the  authorised  representative.
- 3. The data listed in Section C of Annex VIII shall be entered into the EU database by the deployer who is, or who acts on behalf of,  a  public  authority,  agency or  body,  in  accordance  with  Article  49(3)  and  (4).
