The  notion  refers  to  emotions  or  intentions  such  as  happiness,  sadness,  anger,  surprise,  disgust,  embarrassment, excitement,  shame,  contempt,  satisfaction  and  amusement.  It  does  not  include  physical  states,  such  as  pain  or fatigue, including, for example, systems used in detecting the state of fatigue of professional pilots or drivers for the purpose  of  preventing  accidents.  This  does  also  not  include  the  mere  detection  of  readily  apparent  expressions, gestures or  movements, unless they are used for  identifying or  inferring emotions. Those expressions can be basic facial  expressions,  such  as  a  frown  or  a  smile,  or  gestures  such  as  the  movement  of  hands,  arms  or  head,  or characteristics  of  a  person's  voice,  such  as  a  raised  voice  or  whispering.
- (19) For the purposes of this Regulation the notion of 'publicly accessible space' should be understood as referring to any physical  space  that  is  accessible  to  an  undetermined  number  of  natural  persons,  and  irrespective  of  whether  the space in question is privately or publicly owned, irrespective of the activity for which the space may be used, such as for  commerce,  for  example,  shops,  restaurants,  cafés;  for  services,  for  example,  banks,  professional  activities, hospitality;  for  sport,  for  example,  swimming  pools,  gyms,  stadiums;  for  transport,  for  example,  bus,  metro  and railway stations, airports, means of transport; for entertainment, for example, cinemas, theatres, museums, concert and conference halls; or for leisure or otherwise, for example, public roads and squares, parks, forests, playgrounds. A  space  should  also  be  classified  as  being  publicly  accessible  if,  regardless  of  potential  capacity  or  security restrictions, access is subject to certain predetermined conditions which can be fulfilled by an undetermined number of persons, such as the purchase of a ticket or title of transport, prior registration or having a certain age. In contrast, a space should not be considered to be publicly accessible if access is limited to specific and defined natural persons through either Union or national law directly related to public safety or security or through the clear manifestation
of will by the person having the relevant authority over the space. The factual possibility of access alone, such as an unlocked door  or  an  open  gate  in  a  fence,  does  not  imply  that  the  space  is  publicly  accessible  in  the  presence  of indications or circumstances suggesting the contrary, such as. signs prohibiting or restricting access. 