## Guidance
## General
Sensitive  information  should  not  be  kept  for  longer  than  it  is  required  to  reduce  the  risk  of undesirable disclosure.
When deleting information on systems, applications and services, the following should be considered:
- a) selecting a deletion method (e.g. electronic overwriting or cryptographic erasure) in accordance with business requirements and taking into consideration relevant laws and regulations;
- b) recording the results of deletion as evidence;
- c) when  using service suppliers of information deletion, obtaining evidence of information deletion from them.
Where third parties store the organization's information on its behalf, the organization should consider the  inclusion  of  requirements  on  information  deletion  into  the  third-party  agreements  to  enforce  it during and upon termination of such services.
## Deletion methods
In  accordance  with  the  organization's  topic-specific  policy  on  data  retention  and  taking  into consideration relevant legislation  and  regulations,  sensitive  information  should  be  deleted  when  no longer required, by:
- a) configuring systems to securely destroy information when no longer required (e.g. after a defined period subject to the topic-specific policy on data retention or by subject access request);
- b) deleting obsolete versions, copies and temporary files wherever they are located;
- c) using  approved,  secure  deletion  software  to  permanently  delete  information  to  help  ensure information cannot be recovered by using specialist recovery or forensic tools;
- d) using approved, certified providers of secure disposal services;
- e) using  disposal  mechanisms  appropriate  for  the  type  of  storage  media  being  disposed  of  (e.g. degaussing hard disk drives and other magnetic storage media).
Where cloud services are used, the organization should verify if the deletion method provided by the cloud service provider is acceptable, and if it is the case, the organization should use it, or request that the cloud service provider delete the information. These deletion processes should be automated in accordance with topic-specific policies, when available and applicable. Depending on the sensitivity of information deleted, logs can track or verify that these deletion processes have happened.
To avoid the unintentional exposure of sensitive information when equipment is being sent back to vendors,  sensitive  information  should  be  protected  by  removing  auxiliary  storages  (e.g.  hard  disk drives) and memory before equipment leaves the organization's premises.
Considering that the secure deletion of some devices (e.g. smartphones) can only be achieved through destruction  or  using  the  functions  embedded  in  these  devices  (e.g.  'restore  factory  settings'),  the organization  should  choose  the  appropriate  method  according  to  the  classification  of  information handled by such devices.
Control  measures  described  in    should  be  applied  to  physically  destroy  the  storage  device  and simultaneously delete the information it contains.
An official record of information deletion is useful when analysing the cause of a possible information leakage event.
## Other information
Information on user data deletion in cloud services can be found in ISO/IEC 27017.
Information on deletion of PII can be found in ISO/IEC 27555.
##  Data masking
| Control type   | Information security properties   | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities   | Security domains   |
|----------------|-----------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|--------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality                  | #Protect                 | #Information_protection    | #Protection        |
## Control
Data  masking  should  be  used  in  accordance  with  the  organization's  topic-specific  policy  on  access control  and  other  related  topic-specific  policies,  and  business  requirements,  taking  applicable legislation into consideration.
## Purpose
To limit the exposure of sensitive data including PII, and to comply with legal, statutory, regulatory and contractual requirements.
## Guidance
Where the protection of sensitive data (e.g. 