## Other information
No other information.
##  Threat intelligence
| Control type                       | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts     | Operational capabilities               | Security domains     |
|------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------|
| #Preventive #Detective #Corrective | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Identify #Detect #Respond | #Threat_and_vulner- ability_management | #Defence #Resilience |
## Control
Information relating to information security threats should be collected and analysed to produce threat intelligence.
## Purpose
To  provide  awareness  of  the  organization's  threat  environment  so  that  the  appropriate  mitigation actions can be taken.
## Guidance
Information about existing or emerging threats is collected and analysed in order to:
- a) facilitate informed actions to prevent the threats from causing harm to the organization;
- b) reduce the impact of such threats.
Threat intelligence can be divided into three layers, which should all be considered:
- a) strategic  threat  intelligence:  exchange  of  high-level  information  about  the  changing  threat landscape (e.g. types of attackers or types of attacks);
- b) tactical threat intelligence: information about attacker methodologies, tools and technologies involved;
- c) operational threat intelligence: details about specific attacks, including technical indicators.
Threat intelligence should be:
- a) relevant (i.e. related to the protection of the organization);
- b) insightful  (i.e.  providing  the  organization  with  an  accurate  and  detailed  understanding  of  the threat landscape);
- c) contextual, to provide situational awareness (i.e. adding context to the information based on the time of events, where they occur, previous experiences and prevalence in similar organizations);
- d) actionable (i.e. the organization can act on information quickly and effectively).
Threat intelligence activities should include:
- a) establishing objectives for threat intelligence production;
- b) identifying, vetting and selecting internal and external information sources that are necessary and appropriate to provide information required for the production of threat intelligence;
- c) collecting information from selected sources, which can be internal and external;
- d) processing  information  collected  to  prepare  it  for  analysis  (e.g.  by  translating,  formatting  or corroborating information);
- e) analysing information to understand how it relates and is meaningful to the organization;
- f) communicating and sharing it to relevant individuals in a format that can be understood.
Threat intelligence should be analysed and later used:
- a) by implementing processes to include information gathered from threat intelligence sources into the organization's information security risk management processes;
- b) as additional input to technical preventive and detective controls like firewalls, intrusion detection system, or anti malware solutions;
- c) as input to the information security test processes and techniques.
The organization should share threat intelligence with other organizations on a mutual basis in order to improve overall threat intelligence.
## Other information
Organizations can use threat intelligence to prevent, detect, or respond to threats. Organizations can produce threat intelligence, but more typically receive and make use of threat intelligence produced by other sources.
Threat intelligence is often provided by independent providers or advisors, government agencies or collaborative threat intelligence groups.
The effectiveness of controls such as , ,  or , depends on the quality of available threat intelligence.
##  Information	security	in	project	management
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities   | Security domains                        |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|-----------------------------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Identify #Protect       | #Governance                | #Governance_and_Ecosys- tem #Protection |
## Control
Information security should be integrated into project management.
## Purpose
To ensure information security risks related to projects and deliverables are effectively addressed in project management throughout the project life cycle.
## Guidance
Information security should be integrated into project management to ensure information security risks are addressed as part of the project management. This can be applied to any type of project regardless of its complexity, size, duration, discipline or application area (e.g. a project for a core business process, ICT, facility management or other supporting processes).
The project management in use should require that:
- a) information security risks are assessed and treated at an early stage and periodically as part of project risks throughout the project life cycle;
- b) information  security  requirements  [e.g.  application  security  requirements  (),  requirements for  complying  with  intellectual  property  rights  ( ),  etc.]  are  addressed  in  the  early  stages of projects;
- c) information security risks associated with the execution of projects, such as security of internal and external communication aspects are considered and treated throughout the project life cycle;
- d) progress on information security risk treatment is reviewed and effectiveness of the treatment is evaluated and tested.
The appropriateness of the information security considerations and activities should be followed up at predefined stages by suitable persons or governance bodies, such as the project steering committee.
Responsibilities and authorities for information security relevant to the project should be defined and allocated to specified roles.
Information security requirements for products or services to be delivered by the project should be determined  using  various  methods,  including  deriving  compliance  requirements  from  information security policy, topic-specific policies and regulations. Further information security requirements can be derived from activities such as threat modelling, incident reviews, use of vulnerability thresholds or contingency planning, thus ensuring that the architecture and design of information systems are protected against known threats based on the operational environment.
Information  security  requirements  should  be  determined  for  all  types  of  projects,  not  only  ICT development projects. The following should also be considered when determining these requirements:
- a) what information is involved (information determination), what are the corresponding information security needs (classification; see ) and the potential negative business impact which can result from lack of adequate security;
- b) the required protection needs of information and other associated assets involved, particularly in terms of confidentiality, integrity and availability;
- c) the level of confidence or assurance required towards the claimed identity of entities in order to derive the authentication requirements;
- d) access provisioning and authorization processes, for customers and other potential business users as well as for privileged or technical users such as relevant project members, potential operation staff or external suppliers;
- e) informing users of their duties and responsibilities;
- f) requirements derived from business processes, such as transaction logging and monitoring, nonrepudiation requirements;
- g) requirements  mandated  by  other  information  security  controls  (e.g.  interfaces  to  logging  and monitoring or data leakage detection systems);
- h) compliance  with  the  legal,  statutory,  regulatory  and  contractual  environment  in  which  the organization operates;
- i) level of confidence or assurance required for third parties to meet the organization's information security policy and topic-specific policies including relevant security clauses in any agreements or contracts.
## Other information
The  project  development  approach,  such  as  waterfall  life  cycle  or  agile  life  cycle,  should  support information  security  in  a  structured  way  that  can  be  adapted  to  suit  the  assessed  severity  of  the information security risks, based on the character of the project. Early consideration of information security  requirements  for  the  product  or  service  (e.g.  at  the  planning  and  design  stages),  can  lead to  more  effective  and  cost-efficient  solutions  for  quality  and  information  security.  ISO  21500  and ISO 21502 provide guidance on concepts and processes of project management that are important for the performance of projects.
ISO/IEC 27005 provides guidance on the use of risk management processes to identify controls to meet information security requirements.
##  Inventory of information and other associated assets
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities   | Security domains                        |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|-----------------------------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Identify                | #Asset_manage- ment        | #Governance_and_Eco- system #Protection |
## Control
An  inventory  of  information  and  other  associated  assets,  including  owners,  should  be  developed and maintained.
## Purpose
To  identify  the  organization's  information  and  other  associated  assets  in  order  to  preserve  their information security and assign appropriate ownership.
## Guidance
## Inventory
The  organization  should  identify  its  information  and  other  associated  assets  and  determine  their importance  in  terms  of  information  security.  Documentation  should  be  maintained  in  dedicated  or existing inventories as appropriate.
The inventory of information and other associated assets should be accurate, up to date, consistent and aligned with other inventories. Options for ensuring accuracy of an inventory of information and other associated assets include:
- a) conducting  regular  reviews  of  identified  information  and  other  associated  assets  against  the asset inventory;
- b) automatically enforcing an inventory update in the process of installing, changing or removing an asset.
The location of an asset should be included in the inventory as appropriate.
The inventory does not need to be a single list of information and other associated assets. Considering that the inventory should be maintained by the relevant functions, it can be seen as a set of dynamic inventories, such as inventories for information assets, hardware, software, virtual machines (VMs), facilities, personnel, competence, capabilities and records.
Each  asset  should  be  classified  in  accordance  with  the  classification  of  the  information  (see ) associated to that asset.
The  granularity  of  the  inventory  of  information  and  other  associated  assets  should  be  at  a  level appropriate for the needs of the organization. Sometimes specific instances of assets in the information life cycle are not feasible to be documented due to the nature of the asset. An example of a short-lived asset is a VM instance whose life cycle can be of short duration.
## Ownership
For the identified information and other associated assets, ownership of the asset should be assigned to  an  individual  or  a  group  and  the  classification  should  be  identified  (see ,  ).  A  process  to ensure timely assignment of asset ownership should be implemented. Ownership should be assigned when assets are created or when assets are transferred to the organization. Asset ownership should be reassigned as necessary when current asset owners leave or change job roles.
## Owner duties
The asset owner should be responsible for the proper management of an asset over the whole asset life cycle, ensuring that:
- a) information and other associated assets are inventoried;
- b) information and other associated assets are appropriately classified and protected;
- c) the classification is reviewed periodically;
- d) components supporting technology assets are listed and linked, such as database, storage, software components and sub-components;
- e) requirements  for  the  acceptable  use  of  information  and  other  associated  assets  (see  )  are established;
- f) access restrictions correspond with the classification and that they are effective and are reviewed periodically;
- g) information and other associated assets, when deleted or disposed, are handled in a secure manner and removed from the inventory;
- h) they are involved in the identification and management of risks associated with their asset(s);
- i) they support personnel who have the roles and responsibilities of managing their information.
## Other information
Inventories  of  information  and  other  associated  assets  are  often  necessary  to  ensure  the  effective protection of information and can be required for other purposes, such as health and safety, insurance or  financial  reasons.  Inventories  of  information  and  other  associated  assets  also  support  risk management, audit activities, vulnerability management, incident response and recovery planning.
Tasks and responsibilities can be delegated (e.g. 