to a custodian looking after the assets on a daily basis), but the person or group who delegated them remains accountable.
It can be useful to designate groups of information and other associated assets which act together to provide a particular service. In this case, the owner of this service is accountable for the delivery of the service, including the operation of its assets.
See ISO/IEC 19770-1 for additional information on information technology (IT) asset management. See ISO 55001 for additional information on asset management.
## 	Acceptable	use	of	information	and	other	associated	assets
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities                    | Security domains                        |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|---------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #Asset_management #Information_pro- tection | #Governance_and_Ecosys- tem #Protection |
## Control
Rules  for  the  acceptable  use  and  procedures  for  handling  information  and  other  associated  assets should be identified, documented and implemented.
## Purpose
To ensure information and other associated assets are appropriately protected, used and handled.
## Guidance
Personnel and external party users using or having access to the organization's information and other associated assets should be made aware of the information security requirements for protecting and handling the organization's information and other associated assets. They should be responsible for their use of any information processing facilities.
The organization should establish a topic-specific policy on the acceptable use of information and other associated assets and communicate it to anyone who uses or handles information and other associated assets. The topic-specific policy on acceptable use should provide clear direction on how individuals are expected to use information and other associated assets. The topic-specific policy should state:
- a) expected and unacceptable behaviours of individuals from an information security perspective;
- b) permitted and prohibited use of information and other associated assets;
- c) monitoring activities being performed by the organization.
Acceptable use procedures should be drawn up for the full information life cycle in accordance with its classification (see ) and determined risks. The following items should be considered:
- a) access restrictions supporting the protection requirements for each level of classification;
- b) maintenance of a record of the authorized users of information and other associated assets;
- c) protection  of  temporary  or  permanent  copies  of  information  to  a  level  consistent  with  the protection of the original information;
- d) storage of assets associated with information in accordance with manufacturers' specifications (see  );
- e) clear  marking  of  all  copies  of  storage  media  (electronic  or  physical)  for  the  attention  of  the authorized recipient (see  );
- f) authorization  of  disposal  of  information  and  other  associated  assets  and  supported  deletion method(s) (see ).
## Other information
It can be the case that the assets concerned do not directly belong to the organization, such as public cloud services. The use of such third-party assets and any assets of the organization associated with such  external  assets  (e.g.  information,  software)  should  be  identified  as  applicable  and  controlled, for  example,  through  agreements  with  cloud  service  providers.  Care  should  also  be  taken  when  a collaborative working environment is used.
##  Return of assets
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities   | Security domains   |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|--------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #Asset_manage- ment        | #Protection        |
## Control
Personnel and other interested parties as appropriate should return all the organization's assets in their possession upon change or termination of their employment, contract or agreement.
## Purpose
To  protect  the  organization's  assets  as  part  of  the  process  of  changing  or  terminating  employment, contract or agreement.
## Guidance
The change or termination process should be formalized to include the return of all previously issued physical and electronic assets owned by or entrusted to the organization.
In cases where personnel and other interested parties purchase the organization's equipment or use their own personal equipment, procedures should be followed to ensure that all relevant information is traced and transferred to the organization and securely deleted from the equipment (see ).
In cases where personnel and other interested parties have knowledge that is important to ongoing operations, that information should be documented and transferred to the organization.
During  the  notice  period  and  thereafter,  the  organization  should  prevent  unauthorized  copying  of relevant information (e.g. intellectual property) by personnel under notice of termination.
