The organization should clearly identify and document all information and other associated assets to be returned which can include:
- a) user endpoint devices;
- b) portable storage devices;
- c) specialist equipment;
- d) authentication hardware (e.g. mechanical keys, physical tokens and smartcards) for information systems, sites and physical archives;
- e) physical copies of information.
## Other information
It can be difficult to return information held on assets which are not owned by the organization. In such cases, it is necessary to restrict the use of information using other information security controls such as access rights management () or use of cryptography ().
## 	Classification	of	information
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities   | Security domains     |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Identify                | #Information_pro- tection  | #Protection #Defence |
## Control
Information should be classified according to the information security needs of the organization based on confidentiality, integrity, availability and relevant interested party requirements.
## Purpose
To ensure identification and understanding of protection needs of information in accordance with its importance to the organization.
## Guidance
The organization should establish a topic-specific policy on information classification and communicate it to all relevant interested parties.
The organization should take into account requirements for confidentiality, integrity and availability in the classification scheme.
Classifications  and  associated  protective  controls  for  information  should  take  account  of  business needs for sharing or restricting information, for protecting integrity of information and for assuring availability, as well as legal requirements concerning the confidentiality, integrity or availability of the information. Assets other than information can also be classified in compliance with classification of information, which is stored in, processed by or otherwise handled or protected by the asset.
Owners of information should be accountable for their classification.
The classification scheme should include conventions for classification and criteria for review of the classification over time. Results of classification should be updated in accordance with changes of the value, sensitivity and criticality of information through their life cycle.
The scheme should be aligned to the topic-specific policy on access control (see ) and should be able to address specific business needs of the organization.
The classification can be determined by the level of impact that the information's compromise would have for the organization. Each level defined in the scheme should be given a name that makes sense in the context of the classification scheme's application.
The scheme should be consistent across the whole organization and included in its procedures so that everyone classifies information and applicable other associated assets in the same way. In this manner, everyone has a common understanding of protection requirements and applies appropriate protection.
The  classification  scheme  used  within  the  organization  can  be  different  from  the  schemes  used  by other organizations, even if the names for levels are similar. In addition, information moving between organizations can vary in classification  depending  on  its  context  in  each  organization,  even  if  their classification  schemes  are  identical.  Therefore,  agreements  with  other  organizations  that  include information sharing should include procedures to identify the classification of that information and to interpret the classification levels from other organizations. Correspondence between different schemes can be determined by looking for equivalence in the associated handling and protection methods.
## Other information
Classification provides people who deal with information with a concise indication of how to handle and protect it. Creating groups of information with similar protection needs and specifying information security  procedures  that  apply  to  all  the  information  in  each  group  facilitates  this.  This  approach reduces the need for case-by-case risk assessment and custom design of controls.
Information can cease to be sensitive or critical after a certain period of time. For example, when the information has been made public, it no longer has confidentiality requirements but can still require protection  for  its  integrity  and  availability  properties.  These  aspects  should  be  taken  into  account, as over-classification can lead to the implementation of unnecessary controls resulting in additional expense  or,  on  the  contrary,  under-classification  can  lead  to  insufficient  controls  to  protect  the information from compromise.
As an example, an information confidentiality classification scheme can be based on four levels as follows:
- a) disclosure causes no harm;
- b) disclosure causes minor reputational damage or minor operational impact;
- c) disclosure has a significant short-term impact on operations or business objectives;
- d) disclosure  has  a  serious  impact  on  long  term  business  objectives  or  puts  the  survival  of  the organization at risk.
## 	Labelling	of	information
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities   | Security domains     |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #Information_ protection   | #Defence #Protection |
## Control
An appropriate set of procedures for information labelling should be developed and implemented in accordance with the information classification scheme adopted by the organization.
## Purpose
To facilitate the communication of classification of information and support automation of information processing and management.
## Guidance
Procedures  for  information  labelling  should  cover  information  and  other  associated  assets  in  all formats. The labelling should reflect the classification scheme established in . The labels should be easily recognizable. 