1).
- ( 4 ) Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 July 2008 setting out the requirements for accredita­ tion and market surveillance relating to the marketing of products and repealing Regulation (EEC) No 339/93 (OJ L 218, , p. 30).
- ( 5 ) Decision No 768/2008/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 July 2008 on a common framework for the marketing of products, and repealing Council Decision 93/465/EEC (OJ L 218, , p. 82). - (28) For  the  purpose  of  this  Regulation,  the  activities  of  distributors  should  be  deemed  to  include  acquisition,  holding and supplying of devices.
- (29) Several  of  the  obligations  on  manufacturers,  such  as  clinical  evaluation  or  vigilance  reporting,  that  were  set  out only  in  the  Annexes  to  Directives  90/385/EEC  and  93/42/EEC,  should  be  incorporated  into  the  enacting provisions of this Regulation to facilitate its application.
- (30) Health  institutions  should  have  the  possibility  of  manufacturing,  modifying  and  using  devices  in-house  and thereby address, on a non-industrial scale,  the specific  needs  of  target patient  groups  which cannot be  met  at the appropriate  level of performance  by  an  equivalent  device  available  on the market.  In that context, it is appropriate  to  provide  that  certain  rules  of  this  Regulation,  as  regards  medical  devices  manufactured  and  used only  within  health  institutions,  including  hospitals  as  well  as  institutions,  such  as  laboratories  and  public  health institutes  that  support  the  healthcare  system  and/or  address  patient  needs,  but  which  do  not  treat  or  care  for patients  directly,  should  not  apply,  since  the  aims  of  this  Regulation  would  still  be  met  in  a  proportionate manner.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  concept  of  'health  institution'  does  not  cover  establishments  primarily claiming  to  pursue  health  interests  or  healthy  lifestyles,  such  as  gyms,  spas,  wellness  and  fitness  centres.  As a result, the exemption applicable to health institutions does not apply to such establishments.
- (31) In  view  of  the  fact  that  natural  or  legal  persons  can  claim  compensation  for  damage  caused  by  a  defective  device in  accordance  with  applicable  Union  and  national  law,  it  is  appropriate  to  require  manufacturers  to  have measures  in  place  to  provide  sufficient  financial  coverage  in  respect  of  their  potential  liability  under  Council Directive  85/374/EEC  ( 1 ).  Such  measures  should  be  proportionate  to  the  risk  class,  type  of  device  and  the  size  of the enterprise.  In  this  context,  it  is  also  appropriate  to  lay  down  rules  concerning  the  facilitation,  by  a  competent authority, of  the provision of information to persons who may have been injured by a defective device.
- (32) To  ensure  that  devices  manufactured  in  series  production  continue  to  be  in  conformity  with  the  requirements  of this  Regulation  and  that  experience  from  the  use  of  the  devices  they  manufacture  is  taken  into  account  for  the production  process,  all  manufacturers  should  have  a  quality  management  system  and  a  post-market  surveillance system  in  place  which  should  be  proportionate  to  the  risk  class  and  the  type  of  the  device  in  question.  In addition,  in  order  to  minimize  risks  or  prevent  incidents  related  to  devices,  manufacturers  should  establish a system for risk management and a system for reporting of incidents and field safety corrective actions.
- (33) The  risk  management  system  should  be  carefully  aligned  with  and  reflected  in  the  clinical  evaluation  for  the device,  including  the  clinical  risks  to  be  addressed  as  part  of  clinical  investigations,  clinical  evaluation  and post-market clinical  follow  up.  The  risk  management  and  clinical  evaluation  processes  should  be  inter-dependent and should be regularly updated.
- (34) It  should be ensured that supervision and control of  the manufacture of devices, and the post-market surveillance and  vigilance  activities  concerning  them,  are  carried  out  within  the  manufacturer's  organisation  by  a  person responsible for regulatory compliance who fulfils minimum conditions of qualification.
- (35) For  manufacturers  who  are  not  established  in  the  Union,  the  authorised  representative  plays  a  pivotal  role  in ensuring  the  compliance  of  the  devices  produced  by  those  manufacturers  and  in  serving  as  their  contact  person established  in  the  Union.  Given  that  pivotal  role,  for  the  purposes  of  enforcement  it  is  appropriate  to  make  the authorised  representative  legally  liable  for  defective  devices  in  the  event  that  a  manufacturer  established  outside the  Union  has  not  complied  with  its  general  obligations.  The  liability  of  the  authorised  representative  provided for  in  this  Regulation  is  without  prejudice  to  the  provisions  of  Directive  85/374/EEC,  and  accordingly  the authorised representative should be jointly and severally liable with the importer and the manufacturer. The tasks of  an  authorised  representative  should  be  defined  in  a  written  mandate.  Considering  the  role  of  authorised representatives, the minimum requirements they should meet should be clearly defined, including the requirement  of  having  available  a  person  who  fulfils  minimum  conditions  of  qualification  which  should  be similar  to those for a manufacturer's person responsible for regulatory compliance.
( 1 ) Council  Directive  85/374/EEC  of  25  July  1985  on  the  approximation  of  the  laws,  regulations  and  administrative  provisions  of  the Member States concerning liability for defective products (OJ L 210, , p. 29). - (36) To ensure legal certainty  in respect of  the  obligations  incumbent on economic operators, it is necessary to clarify when a distributor, importer or other person is to be considered the manufacturer of a device.
- (37) Parallel trade in products already placed on the market is a lawful form of trade within the internal market on the basis  of  Article  34  TFEU  subject  to  the  limitations  arising  from  the  need  for  protection  of  health  and  safety  and from  the  need  for  protection  of  intellectual  property  rights  provided  for  under  Article  36  TFEU.  Application  of the principle of parallel trade is,  however,  subject to  different  interpretations  in  the  Member  States.  The conditions,  in  particular  the  requirements  for  relabelling  and  repackaging,  should  therefore  be  specified  in  this Regulation, taking into account the case-law of the Court of Justice  ( 1 )  in  other  relevant  sectors  and  existing  good practice in the field of medical devices.
- (38) The  reprocessing  and  further  use  of  single-use  devices  should  only  take  place  where  permitted  by  national  law and  while  complying  with  the  requirements  laid  down  in  this  Regulation.  The  reprocessor  of  a  single-use  device should  be  considered  to  be  the  manufacturer  of  the  reprocessed  device  and  should  assume  the  obligations incumbent  on  manufacturers  under  this  Regulation.  Nevertheless,  Member  States  should  have  the  possibility  of deciding  that  the  obligations  relating  to  reprocessing  and  re-use  of  single-use  devices  within  a  health  institution or by an external reprocessor acting on its behalf may differ from the obligations on a manufacturer described in this  Regulation. In  principle,  such  divergence  should  only  be  permitted  where  reprocessing  and  reuse  of single-use  devices  within  a  health  institution  or  by  an  external  reprocessor  are  compliant  with  CS  that  have  been adopted,  or,  in  the  absence  of  such  CS,  with  relevant  harmonised  standards  and  national  provisions.  The reprocessing  of  such  devices  should  ensure  an  equivalent  level  of  safety  and  performance  to  that  of the corresponding initial single-use device.
- (39) Patients  who  are  implanted  with  a  device  should  be  given  clear  and  easily  accessible  essential  information allowing  the  implanted  device  to  be  identified  and  other  relevant  information  about  the  device,  including  any necessary  health  risk  warnings  or  precautions  to  be  taken,  for  example  indications  as  to  whether  or  not  it  is compatible with certain diagnostic devices or  with scanners used for security controls.
- (40) Devices  should,  as  a  general  rule,  bear  the  CE  marking  to  indicate  their  conformity  with  this  Regulation  so  that they  can  move  freely  within  the  Union  and  be  put  into  service  in  accordance  with  their  intended  purpose. Member  States  should  not  create  obstacles  to  the  placing  on  the  market  or  putting  into  service  of  devices  that comply with the requirements laid down in this Regulation. However, Member States should be allowed to decide whether  to  restrict  the  use  of  any  specific  type  of  device  in  relation  to  aspects  that  are  not  covered  by  this Regulation.
- (41) The traceability of devices by means of a Unique Device Identification system (UDI system) based on international guidance  should  significantly  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  the  post-market  safety-related  activities  for  devices, which  is  owing  to  improved  incident  reporting,  targeted  field  safety  corrective  actions  and  better  monitoring  by competent  authorities.  It  should  also  help  to  reduce  medical  errors  and  to  fight  against  falsified  devices.  Use  of the  UDI  system  should  also  improve  purchasing  and  waste  disposal  policies  and  stock-management  by  health institutions  and  other  economic  operators  and,  where  possible,  be  compatible  with  other  authentication  systems already in place in those settings.
- (42) The  UDI  system  should  apply  to  all  devices  placed  on  the  market  except  custom-made  devices,  and  be  based  on internationally  recognised  principles  including  definitions  that  are  compatible  with  those  used  by  major  trade partners.  In  order  for  the  UDI  system  to  become  functional  in  time  for  the  application  of  this  Regulation, detailed rules should be laid down in this Regulation.
- (43) Transparency  and  adequate  access  to  information,  appropriately  presented  for  the  intended  user,  are  essential  in the public interest, to protect public health, to empower  patients and healthcare professionals and to enable them to  make  informed  decisions,  to  provide  a  sound  basis  for  regulatory  decision-making  and  to  build  confidence  in the regulatory system.
- (44) One  key  aspect  in  fulfilling  the  objectives  of  this  Regulation  is  the  creation  of  a  European  database  on  medical devices  (Eudamed)  that  should  integrate  different  electronic  systems  to  collate  and  process  information  regarding devices  on  the  market  and  the  relevant  economic  operators,  certain  aspects  of  conformity  assessment,  notified
( 1 ) Judgment of 28 July 2011 in Orifarm and Paranova, joined cases C-400/09 and C-207/10, ECLI:EU:C:2011:519. bodies,  certificates,  clinical  investigations,  vigilance  and  market  surveillance.  The  objectives  of  the  database  are  to enhance overall transparency, including through better access to information for  the public and healthcare profes­ sionals,  to  avoid  multiple  reporting  requirements,  to  enhance  coordination  between  Member  States  and  to streamline  and  facilitate  the  flow  of  information  between  economic  operators,  notified  bodies  or  sponsors  and Member  States  as  well  as  between  Member  States  among  themselves  and  with  the  Commission.  Within  the internal  market,  this  can  be  ensured  effectively  only  at  Union  level  and  the  Commission  should  therefore further develop and manage the European databank on medical devices set up by Commission Decision 2010/227/EU ( 1 ).
- (45) To  facilitate  the  functioning  of  Eudamed,  an  internationally  recognised  medical  device  nomenclature  should  be available  free  of  charge  to  manufacturers  and  other  natural  or  legal  persons  required  by  this  Regulation  to  use that  nomenclature.  Furthermore,  that  nomenclature  should  be  available,  where  reasonably  practicable,  free  of charge also to other stakeholders.
- (46) Eudamed's  electronic  systems  regarding  devices  on  the  market,  the  relevant  economic  operators  and  certificates should enable the public to be adequately informed about devices on the Union market. The electronic system on clinical  investigations  should  serve  as  a  tool  for  the  cooperation  between  Member  States  and  for  enabling sponsors  to  submit,  on  a  voluntary  basis,  a  single  application  for  several  Member  States  and  to  report  serious adverse events, device deficiencies and related updates. The electronic system on vigilance should enable manufac­ turers  to  report  serious  incidents  and  other  reportable  events  and  to  support  the  coordination  of  the  evaluation of  such  incidents  and  events  by  competent  authorities.  The  electronic  system  regarding  market  surveillance should be a tool for  the exchange of information between competent authorities.
- (47) In  respect  of  data  collated  and  processed  through  the  electronic  systems  of  Eudamed,  Directive  95/46/EC  of  the European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  ( 2 )  applies  to  the  processing  of  personal  data  carried  out  in  the Member  States,  under  the  supervision  of  the  Member  States'  competent  authorities,  in  particular  the  public independent  authorities designated by the Member  States.  Regulation (EC)  No  45/2001  of  the  European Parliament  and  of  the  Council  ( 3 )  applies  to  the  processing  of  personal  data  carried  out  by  the  Commission within  the  framework  of  this  Regulation,  under  the  supervision  of  the  European  Data  Protection  Supervisor.  In accordance  with  Regulation  (EC)  No  45/2001,  the  Commission  should  be  designated  as  the  controller  of Eudamed and its electronic systems.
- (48) For implantable devices and for class III devices, manufacturers should summarise  the main  safety and performance  aspects  of  the  device  and  the  outcome  of  the  clinical  evaluation  in  a  document  that  should  be publicly available.
- (49) The summary of safety and  clinical  performance  for  a  device  should  include  in  particular  the  place  of  the  device in  the  context of diagnostic or  therapeutic options taking into account the clinical evaluation of  that device when compared to the diagnostic or  therapeutic alternatives and the specific conditions under  which that device and its alternatives can be considered.
- (50) The proper  functioning  of  notified  bodies  is  crucial  for  ensuring  a  high  level  of  health  and  safety  protection  and citizens'  confidence  in  the  system.  Designation  and  monitoring  of  notified  bodies  by  the  Member  States,  in accordance with detailed and strict criteria, should therefore be subject to controls at Union level.
- (51) Notified  bodies'  assessments  of  manufacturers'  technical  documentation,  in  particular  documentation  on  clinical evaluation,  should  be  critically  evaluated  by  the  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies.  That  evaluation  should be  part  of  the  risk-based  approach  to  the  oversight  and  monitoring  activities  of  notified  bodies  and  should  be based on sampling of the relevant documentation.
- (52) The  position  of  notified  bodies  vis-à-vis  manufacturers  should  be  strengthened,  including  with  regard  to  their right  and  duty  to  carry out  unannounced  on-site audits  and  to conduct  physical  or  laboratory  tests on  devices  to ensure continuous compliance by manufacturers after receipt of the original certification.
( 1 ) Commission Decision 2010/227/EU of 19 April 2010 on the European Databank for Medical Devices (OJ L 102, , p. 45).
( 2 ) Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data (OJ L 281, , p. 31).
( 3 ) Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2000 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data by the Community institutions and bodies and on the free movement of such data (OJ L 8, , p. 1). - (53) To  increase  transparency  with  regard  to  the  oversight  of  notified  bodies  by  national  authorities,  the  authorities responsible  for  notified  bodies  should  publish  information  on  the  national  measures  governing  the  assessment, designation  and  monitoring  of  notified  bodies.  In  accordance  with  good  administrative  practice,  this  information should  be  kept  up  to  date  by  those  authorities  in  particular  to  reflect  relevant,  significant  or  substantive  changes to the procedures in question.
- (54) The Member State in which a notified body is established should be responsible for enforcing the requirements of this Regulation with regard to that notified body.
- (55) In  view,  in  particular,  of  the  responsibility  of  Member  States  for  the  organisation  and  delivery  of  health  services and  medical  care,  they  should  be  allowed  to  lay  down  additional  requirements  on  notified  bodies  designated  for the  conformity  assessment  of  devices  and  established  on  their  territory  as  far  as  issues  that  are  not  regulated  in this  Regulation  are  concerned.  Any  such  additional  requirements  laid  down  should  not  affect  more  specific horizontal Union legislation on notified bodies and equal treatment of notified bodies.
- (56) For  class  III  implantable  devices  and  class  IIb  active  devices  intended  to  administer  and/or  remove  a  medicinal product,  notified  bodies  should,  except  in  certain  cases,  be  obliged  to  request  expert  panels  to  scrutinise  their clinical  evaluation  assessment  report.  Competent  authorities  should  be  informed  about  devices  that  have  been granted  a  certificate  following  a  conformity  assessment  procedure  involving  an  expert  panel.  The  consultation  of expert  panels  in  relation  to  the  clinical  evaluation  should  lead  to  a  harmonised  evaluation  of  high-risk  medical devices  by  sharing  expertise  on  clinical  aspects  and  developing  CS  on  categories  of  devices  that  have  undergone that consultation process.
- (57) For  class  III  devices  and  for  certain  class  IIb  devices,  a  manufacturer  should  be  able  to  consult  voluntarily  an expert  panel,  prior  to  that  manufacturer's  clinical  evaluation  and/or  investigation,  on  its  clinical  development strategy and on proposals for clinical investigations.
- (58) It  is  necessary,  in  particular  for  the  purpose  of  the  conformity  assessment  procedures,  to maintain  the  division  of devices  into  four  product  classes  in  line  with  international  practice.  The  classification  rules,  which  are  based  on the  vulnerability  of  the  human  body,  should  take  into  account  the  potential  risks  associated  with  the  technical design and manufacture of the devices. To maintain the same level of safety as provided by Directive 90/385/EEC, active implantable devices should be in the highest risk class.
- (59) Rules  under the old regime  applied to invasive devices do  not sufficiently take  account  of the level of invasiveness  and  potential  toxicity  of  certain  devices  which  are  introduced  into  the  human  body.  In  order  to obtain  a  suitable  risk-based  classification  of  devices  that  are  composed  of  substances  or  of  combinations  of substances that are absorbed by or locally dispersed in the human body, it is necessary to introduce specific classi­ fication  rules  for  such  devices.  The  classification  rules  should  take  into  account  the  place  where  the  device performs  its  action  in  or  on  the  human  body,  where  it  is  introduced  or  applied,  and  whether  a  systemic absorption  of  the  substances  of  which  the  device  is  composed,  or  of  the  products  of  metabolism  in  the  human body of those substances occurs.
- (60) The  conformity  assessment  procedure  for  class  I  devices  should  be  carried  out,  as  a  general  rule,  under  the  sole responsibility of manufacturers in view of  the low level of vulnerability associated with such devices. For class IIa, class IIb and class III devices, an appropriate level of involvement of a notified body should be compulsory.
- (61) The  conformity  assessment  procedures  for  devices  should  be  further  strengthened  and  streamlined  whilst  the requirements  for  notified  bodies  as  regards  the  performance  of  their  assessments  should  be  clearly  specified  to ensure a level playing field.
- (62) It  is  appropriate  that  certificates  of  free  sale  contain  information  that  makes  it  possible  to  use  Eudamed  in  order to obtain information on the device, in particular  with regard to whether it is on the market, withdrawn from the market or recalled, and on any certificate on its conformity.
- (63) To  ensure  a  high  level  of  safety  and  performance,  demonstration  of  compliance  with  the  general  safety  and performance requirements laid down in this Regulation should be based on clinical data that, for class  III  devices and  implantable  devices  should,  as  a  general  rule,  be  sourced  from  clinical  investigations  that  have  been  carried out under  the responsibility of a sponsor. It should be possible both for  the manufacturer and for another  natural or legal person to be the sponsor taking responsibility for  the clinical investigation. - (64) The  rules  on  clinical  investigations  should  be  in  line  with  well-established  international  guidance  in  this  field, such as the international standard ISO 14155:2011 on good clinical practice for clinical investigations of medical devices  for  human  subjects,  so  as  to  make  it  easier  for  the  results  of  clinical  investigations  conducted  in  the Union to be accepted as documentation outside the Union and to make it easier for  the results of clinical investi­ gations conducted outside the Union in accordance with international guidelines to be accepted within the Union. In addition, the rules should  be  in line with  the  most  recent  version  of the  World  Medical  Association Declaration of Helsinki on Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects.
- (65) It  should  be  left  to  the  Member  State  where  a  clinical  investigation  is  to  be  conducted  to  determine  the appropriate  authority  to  be  involved  in  the  assessment  of  the  application  to  conduct  a  clinical  investigation  and to organise the involvement of ethics committees within the timelines for the authorisation of that clinical investi­ gation  as  set  out  in  this  Regulation.  Such  decisions  are  a  matter  of  internal  organisation  for  each  Member  State. In  that  context,  Member  States  should  ensure  the  involvement  of  laypersons,  in  particular  patients  or  patients' organisations. They should also ensure that the necessary expertise is available.
- (66) Where, in the  course  of a  clinical  investigation,  harm  caused  to  a  subject  leads  to  the  civil  or  criminal  liability of the  investigator  or  the  sponsor  being  invoked,  the  conditions  for  liability  in  such  cases,  including  issues  of causality and the level of damages and sanctions, should remain governed by national law.
- (67) An  electronic  system  should  be  set  up  at  Union  level  to  ensure  that  every  clinical  investigation  is  recorded  and reported  in  a  publicly  accessible  database.  To  protect  the  right  to  the  protection  of  personal  data,  recognised  by Article  8  of  the  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights  of  the  European  Union  ('the  Charter'),  no  personal  data  of subjects  participating  in  a  clinical  investigation  should  be  recorded  in  the  electronic  system.  To  ensure  synergies with the area of clinical trials on medicinal products, the electronic system on clinical investigations should be in­ teroperable with the EU database to be set up for clinical trials on medicinal products for human use.
- (68) Where  a  clinical  investigation  is  to  be  conducted  in  more  than  one  Member  State,  the  sponsor  should  have  the possibility  of  submitting  a  single  application  in  order  to  reduce  administrative  burden.  In  order  to  allow  for resource-sharing  and  to  ensure  consistency  regarding  the  assessment  of  the  health  and  safety-related  aspects  of the investigational  device  and  of the scientific design  of that clinical investigation,  the  procedure  for the assessment  of  such  single  application  should  be  coordinated  between  the  Member  States  under  the  direction  of a  coordinating  Member  State.  Such  coordinated  assessment  should  not  include  the  assessment  of  intrinsically national,  local  and  ethical  aspects  of  a  clinical  investigation,  including  informed  consent.  For  an  initial  period  of seven  years  from  the  date  of  application  of  this  Regulation,  Member  States  should  be  able  to  participate  on a  voluntary  basis  in  the  coordinated  assessment.  After  that  period,  all  Member  States  should  be  obliged  to participate  in  the  coordinated  assessment.  The  Commission,  based  on  the  experience  gained  from  the  voluntary coordination  between  Member  States,  should  draw  up  a  report  on  the  application  of  the  relevant  provisions regarding  the  coordinated  assessment  procedure.  In  the  event  that  the  findings  of  the  report  are  negative,  the Commission  should  submit  a  proposal  to  extend  the  period  of  participation  on  a  voluntary  basis  in  the coordinated assessment procedure.
- (69) Sponsors  should  report  certain  adverse  events  and  device  deficiencies  that  occur  during  clinical  investigations  to the  Member  States  in  which  those  clinical  investigations  are  being  conducted.  Member  States  should  have  the possibility  of  terminating  or  suspending  the  investigations  or  revoking  the  authorisation  for  those  investigations, if  considered necessary to ensure a high level of protection of  the subjects participating in a clinical investigation. Such information should be communicated to the other Member States.
- (70) The  sponsor  of  a  clinical  investigation  should  submit  a  summary  of  results  of  the  clinical  investigation  that  is easily  understandable  for  the  intended  user  together  with  the  clinical  investigation  report,  where  applicable, within  the  timelines  laid  down  in  this  Regulation.  Where  it  is  not  possible  to  submit  the  summary  of  the  results within  the  defined  timelines  for  scientific  reasons,  the  sponsor  should  justify  this  and  specify  when  the  results will be submitted.
- (71) This  Regulation  should  cover  clinical  investigations  intended  to  gather  clinical  evidence  for  the  purpose  of demonstrating conformity of devices and should also lay down basic requirements regarding ethical and scientific assessments for other  types of clinical investigations of medical devices. - (72) Incapacitated  subjects,  minors,  pregnant  women  and  breastfeeding  women  require  specific  protection  measures. However,  it  should  be  left  to  Member  States  to  determine  the  legally  designated  representatives  of  incapacitated subjects and minors.
- (73) The  principles  of  replacement,  reduction  and  refinement  in  the  area  of  animal  experimentation  laid  down  in  the Directive  2010/63/EU  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  ( 1 )  should  be  observed.  In  particular,  the unnecessary duplication of tests and studies should be avoided.
- (74) Manufacturers  should  play  an  active  role  during  the  post-market  phase  by  systematically  and  actively  gathering information from post-market experience with their devices in order  to update their  technical documentation and cooperate with the national competent authorities in charge of vigilance and market surveillance activities. To this end,  manufacturers  should  establish  a  comprehensive  post-market  surveillance  system,  set  up  under  their  quality management  system  and  based  on  a  post-market  surveillance  plan.  Relevant  data  and  information  gathered through  post-market  surveillance,  as  well  as  lessons  learned  from  any  implemented  preventive  and/or  corrective actions,  should  be  used  to  update  any  relevant  part  of  technical  documentation,  such  as  those  relating  to  risk assessment and clinical evaluation, and should also serve the purpose of transparency.
- (75) In  order  to  better  protect  health  and  safety  regarding  devices  on  the  market,  the  electronic  system  on  vigilance for  devices  should  be  made  more  effective  by  creating  a  central  portal  at  Union  level  for  reporting  serious incidents and field safety corrective actions.
- (76) Member  States  should  take  appropriate  measures  to  raise  awareness  among  healthcare  professionals,  users  and patients  about  the  importance  of  reporting  incidents.  Healthcare  professionals,  users  and  patients  should  be encouraged  and  enabled  to  report  suspected  serious  incidents  at  national  level  using  harmonised  formats.  The national  competent  authorities  should  inform  manufacturers  of  any  suspected  serious  incidents  and,  where a  manufacturer  confirms  that  such  an  incident  has  occurred,  the  authorities  concerned  should  ensure  that appropriate follow-up action is taken in order  to minimise recurrence of such incidents.
- (77) The  evaluation  of  reported  serious  incidents  and  field  safety  corrective  actions  should  be  conducted  at  national level  but  coordination  should  be  ensured  where  similar  incidents  have  occurred  or  field  safety  corrective  actions have  to  be  carried  out  in  more  than  one  Member  State,  with  the  objective  of  sharing  resources  and  ensuring consistency regarding the corrective action.
- (78) In  the  context  of  the  investigation  of  incidents,  the  competent  authorities  should  take  into  account,  where appropriate,  the  information  provided  by  and  views  of  relevant  stakeholders,  including  patient  and  healthcare professionals' organisations and manufacturers' associations.
- (79) The  reporting  of  serious  adverse  events  or  device  deficiencies  during  clinical  investigations  and  the  reporting  of serious  incidents  occurring  after  a  device  has  been  placed  on  the  market  should  be  clearly  distinguished  to  avoid double reporting.
- (80) Rules  on  market  surveillance  should  be  included  in  this  Regulation  to  reinforce  the  rights  and  obligations  of  the national  competent  authorities,  to  ensure  effective  coordination  of  their  market  surveillance  activities  and  to clarify the applicable procedures.
- (81) Any  statistically  significant  increase  in  the  number  or  severity  of  incidents  that  are  not  serious  or  in  expected side-effects  that  could  have  a  significant  impact on  the  benefit-risk  analysis  and  which  could  lead  to unacceptable risks  should  be  reported  to  the  competent  authorities  in  order  to  permit  their  assessment  and  the  adoption  of appropriate measures.
- (82) An expert  committee,  the  Medical  Device  Coordination  Group  (MDCG),  composed  of  persons  designated  by  the Member  States  based  on  their  role  and  expertise  in  the  field  of  medical  devices  including in  vitro diagnostic medical devices, should be established to fulfil the tasks conferred on it by this Regulation and by Regulation  (EU)  2017/746  of the  European  Parliament and of the Council  ( 2 ), to provide advice to the Commission  and  to  assist  the  Commission  and  the  Member  States  in  ensuring  a  harmonised  implementation  of this  Regulation.  The  MDCG  should  be  able  to  establish  subgroups  in  order  to  have  access  to  necessary  in-depth
( 1 ) Directive  2010/63/EU  of  the  European  Parliament and  of  the  Council  of  22  September 2010  on  the  protection of animals  used  for scientific purposes (OJ L 276, , p. 33).
( 2 ) Regulation (EU) 2017/746 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 April 2017 on in vitro diagnostic medical devices and repealing Directive 98/79/EC and Commission Decision 2010/227/EU (see page 176 of this Official Journal). technical  expertise  in  the  field  of  medical  devices  including in  vitro diagnostic  medical  devices.  When  establishing subgroups,  appropriate  consideration  should  be  given  to  the  possibility  of  involving  existing  groups  at  Union level in the field of medical devices.
- (83) Expert  panels  and  expert  laboratories  should  be  designated  by  the  Commission  on  the  basis  of  their  up-to-date clinical,  scientific  or  technical  expertise,  with  the  aim  of  providing  scientific,  technical  and  clinical  assistance  to the  Commission,  the  MDCG,  manufacturers  and  notified  bodies  in  relation  to  the  implementation  of  this Regulation.  