The  notifying  Member  State  shall  provide  the  Commission,  on  request,  with  all  information  regarding  the designation of the notified body concerned.
- 3. The  Commission,  in  conjunction  with  the  MDCG,  may  initiate,  as  applicable,  the  assessment  procedure  described in  Article  39(3)  and  (4),  where  there  is  reasonable  concern  about  the  ongoing  compliance  of  a  notified  body  or a  subsidiary  or  subcontractor  of  the  notified  body  with  the  requirements  set  out  in  Annex  VII  and  where  the  investi­ gation  by  the  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  is  not  deemed  to  have  fully  addressed  the  concerns  or  upon request  of  the  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies.  The  reporting  and  outcome  of  that  assessment  shall  follow  the principles  of  Article  39.  Alternatively,  depending  on  the  severity  of  the  issue,  the  Commission,  in  conjunction  with  the MDCG, may request that the authority responsible for  notified  bodies allow the participation of up to two experts from the  list  established  pursuant  to  Article  40  in  an  on-site  assessment  as  part  of  the  planned  monitoring  and  assessment activities in accordance with Article 44 and as outlined in the annual assessment plan described in Article 44(4).
- 4. Where  the  Commission  ascertains  that  a  notified  body  no  longer  meets  the  requirements  for  its  designation,  it shall  inform  the  notifying  Member  State  accordingly  and  request  it  to  take  the  necessary  corrective  measures,  including the suspension, restriction or  withdrawal of the designation if necessary.
Where  the Member  State fails to take the necessary corrective measures, the  Commission  may,  by  means of implementing  acts,  suspend,  restrict or withdraw  the  designation. Those  implementing  acts  shall  be  adopted  in accordance  with  the  examination  procedure  referred  to  in  Article  114(3).  It  shall  notify  the  Member  State  concerned  of its  decision and update NANDO and the electronic system referred to in Article 57.
- 5. The Commission shall ensure that all confidential information obtained in the course of its investigations is treated accordingly.
## Article 48
## Peer review and exchange of experience between authorities responsible for notified bodies
- 1. The  Commission  shall  provide  for  the  organisation  of  exchange  of  experience  and  coordination  of  administrative practice between the authorities responsible for notified bodies. Such exchange shall cover elements including:
- (a)   development of best practice documents relating to the activities of the authorities responsible for notified bodies;
- (b)   development of guidance documents for notified bodies in relation to the implementation of this Regulation;
- (c)   training and qualification of the experts referred to in Article 40;
- (d)   monitoring  of  trends  relating  to  changes  to  notified  body  designations  and  notifications  and  trends  in  certificate withdrawals and transfers between notified bodies;
- (e)   monitoring of  the application and applicability of scope codes referred to in Article 42(13);
- (f)   development of a mechanism for peer reviews between authorities and the Commission;
- (g)   methods  of  communication  to  the  public  on  the  monitoring  and  surveillance  activities  of  authorities  and  the Commission on notified bodies.
- 2. The  authorities  responsible  for  notified  bodies  shall  participate  in  a  peer  review  every  third  year  through  the mechanism developed pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article. Such reviews shall normally be conducted in parallel with the  on-site  joint  assessments  described  in  Article  39.  Alternatively,  an  authority  may  make  the  choice  of  having  such reviews take place as part of its monitoring activities referred to in Article 44.
- 3. 