For  the  purposes  of  this  Directive,  entities  with  regulatory competences  are  not considered  to  be  carrying  out  activities  in  the  area  of  law  enforcement  and  are  therefore  not  excluded  on  that ground  from  the  scope  of  this  Directive.  Public  administration  entities  that  are  jointly  established  with  a  third country in accordance with an international agreement are excluded from the scope of this Directive. This Directive does  not  apply  to  Member  States'  diplomatic  and  consular  missions  in  third  countries  or  to  their  network  and information systems, insofar as such systems are located in the premises of the mission or are operated for users in a third country.
- (9) Member States should be able to take the necessary measures to ensure the protection of  the essential interests of national  security,  to  safeguard  public  policy  and  public  security,  and  to  allow  for  the  prevention,  investigation, detection  and  prosecution  of  criminal  offences.  To  that  end,  Member  States  should  be  able  to  exempt  specific entities  which  carry  out  activities  in  the  areas  of  national  security,  public  security,  defence  or  law  enforcement, including the prevention, investigation, detection and prosecution of criminal offences, from certain obligations laid down  in  this  Directive  with  regard  to  those  activities.  Where  an  entity  provides  services  exclusively  to  a  public administration entity that is excluded from the scope of this Directive, Member States should be able to exempt that entity from certain obligations laid down in this Directive with regard to those services. Furthermore, no Member State should be required to supply information the disclosure of which would be contrary to the essential interests of  its  national  security,  public  security  or  defence.  Union  or  national  rules  for  the  protection  of  classified information, non-disclosure agreements, and informal non-disclosure agreements such as the traffic light protocol should be taken into account in that context. The traffic light protocol is to be understood as a means to provide information  about  any  limitations  with  regard  to  the  further  spreading  of  information.  It  is  used  in  almost  all computer security incident response teams (CSIRTs) and in some information analysis and sharing centres.
- (10) Although this Directive applies to entities carrying out activities in the production of electricity from nuclear power plants, some of those activities may be linked to national security. Where that is the case, a Member State should be able to exercise its responsibility for safeguarding national security with respect to those activities, including activities within the nuclear value chain, in accordance with the Treaties.
- (11) Some  entities  carry  out  activities  in  the  areas  of  national  security,  public  security,  defence  or  law  enforcement, including the  prevention,  investigation,  detection  and  prosecution  of  criminal  offences,  while  also  providing  trust services.  Trust  service  providers  which  fall  within  the  scope  of  Regulation  (EU)  No  910/2014  of  the  European Parliament and of the Council ( 6 ) should fall within the scope of this Directive in order  to secure the same level of security requirements and supervision as that which was previously laid down in that Regulation in respect of trust service  providers.  In  line  with  the  exclusion  of  certain  specific  services  from  Regulation  (EU)  No  910/2014,  this Directive should not apply to the provision of trust services that are used exclusively within closed systems resulting from national law or from agreements between a defined set of participants.
( 6 ) Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 July 2014 on electronic identification and trust services for electronic transactions in the internal market and repealing Directive 1999/93/EC (OJ L 257, , p. 73). - (12) Postal  service  providers  as  defined  in  Directive  97/67/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council ( 7 ), including providers of courier services, should be subject to this Directive if they provide at least one of the steps in the postal delivery chain, in particular clearance, sorting, transport or distribution of postal items, including pick-up services,  while  taking  account  of  the  degree  of  their  dependence  on  network  and  information  systems.  Transport services that are not undertaken in conjunction with one of those steps should be excluded from the scope of postal services.
- (13) Given the intensification and increased sophistication of cyber  threats, Member States should strive to ensure that entities that are excluded from the scope of  this Directive achieve a high level of cybersecurity and to support the implementation  of  equivalent  cybersecurity  risk-management  measures  that  reflect  the  sensitive  nature  of  those entities.
- (14) Union data protection law and Union privacy law applies to any processing of personal data under this Directive. In particular, this Directive is without prejudice to Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 8 ) and  Directive  2002/58/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council ( 9 ).  This  Directive  should therefore not affect, inter alia,  the  tasks  and  powers  of  the  authorities competent  to monitor compliance with the applicable Union data protection law and Union privacy law.
