This is  important  because  different  provisions  in  those  acts  aim  to  protect  different interests  and  have  different  objectives,  scopes,  and  addressees.  This  ensures  a comprehensive regulatory approach that protects persons and groups of persons from
harmful AI exploitation and manipulation and ensures safe and trustworthy AI-enabled services and products in the Union.
- (136) The prohibitions in Article 5(1)(a) and (b) AI Act align closely with the objectives of EU consumer protection law, in particular the UCPD which protects consumers from business practices that are misleading or aggressive, including when they are AI-driven. Both the AI Act and the UCPD aim to proactively prevent consumer harm from AIdriven business practices that are manipulative, misleading, or aggressive. At the same time, the prohibitions in Article 5(1)(a) and (b) AI Act are broader in scope, since they protect not only consumers, but any natural person and their behaviour in a variety of contexts beyond commercial settings. The harms covered by the AI Act are also broader beyond economic harms, although the AI Act sets a threshold of significant harm that is not present in consumer protection law.
- (137) The  prohibitions  are  also  consistent  with  Union  data  protection  law,  including  the principles  on  lawful,  fair,  and  transparent  data  processing,  that  aims  to  protect  data subjects' personal data and ultimately preserve their fundamental rights and autonomy. The availability of more (personal) data and the increased possibilities to process this data  with  AI  systems  increase  the  risk  of  harmful  manipulative,  deceptive  or exploitative practices, such as those falling within the scope of Article 5(1)(a) and (b) AI Act. 