- (432) Nevertheless,  even  in  this  interim  period,  the  prohibitions  are  fully  applicable  and mandatory for providers and deployers of AI systems. Those operators should therefore take necessary measures to ensure that they do not place on the market, put into service or use AI systems that could constitute prohibited practices under Article 5 AI Act. Even  if  the  provisions  on  monitoring  and  fines  do  not  apply  until  a  later  date,  the prohibitions themselves have direct effect and thus enable affected parties to enforce them in national courts and request interim injunctions against the prohibited practices.
## 12. REVIEW AND UPDATE OF THE COMMISSION GUIDELINES
- (433) These  Guidelines  constitute  a  first  interpretation  with  practical  examples  of  the prohibitions in Article 5 AI Act. The Commission will provide additional support to operators  and  authorities  how  to  understand  the  prohibitions  and  collect  further practical use cases on an ongoing basis with input from providers and deployers of AI systems, the AI Board and other relevant stakeholders.
- (434) The Commission will review these Guidelines as soon as this is necessary in view of practical experience gained in the implementation of the prohibitions and the pace of technological, societal, and regulatory developments in this area. This also includes any relevant experience from market surveillance enforcement actions and interpretations given by the CJEU on the prohibitions and other provisions of the AI Act examined in these Guidelines. During such a review, the Commission may decide to withdraw or amend these Guidelines. The Commission encourages providers and deployers of AI systems, national market surveillance authorities through the AI Board, the AI Advisory forum, the research  community, and civil society organisations to contribute to this process by responding to future calls for public consultation.
244 See Article 111(1) and (2) AI Act which specifies that the grandfathering clause is without prejudice to the application of Article 5 AI Act as referred to in Article 113(3)(a) AI Act.