28).
- ( 17 ) Directive  2008/96/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  19  November  2008  on  road  infrastructure  safety management (OJ L 319, , p. 59).
- ( 18 ) Commission  Decision  of  29  June  2018  setting  up  the  EU  Rail  Passenger  Security  Platform  2018/C  232/03  (OJ  C  232,  , p. 10). Background checks should include a check of the criminal records of the person concerned. Member States should use  the  European  Criminal  Records  Information  System  in  accordance  with  the  procedures  set  out  in  Council Framework  Decision  2009/315/JHA ( 19 ) and,  where  relevant  and  applicable,  Regulation  (EU)  2019/816  of  the European Parliament and of the Council ( 20 ) for the purpose of obtaining information from criminal records held by other  Member  States.  Member  States  might  also,  where  relevant  and  applicable,  draw  on  the  Second  Generation Schengen Information System (SIS II) established by Regulation (EU) 2018/1862 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 21 ), intelligence and any other objective information available that might be necessary to determine the suitability of  the  person  concerned  to work  in  the  position  in  relation  to which the  critical  entity  has  requested  a background check.
- (33) A mechanism for  the notification of certain incidents should be established to allow the competent authorities to respond to incidents rapidly and adequately and to have a comprehensive overview of the impact, nature, cause and possible consequences of incidents with which the critical entities deal. Critical entities should notify, without undue delay, the competent authorities of incidents that significantly disrupt or have the potential to significantly disrupt the  provision  of  essential  services.  Unless  operationally  unable  to  do  so,  critical  entities  should  submit  an  initial notification no later than 24 hours after becoming aware of an incident. The initial notification should only include the information strictly necessary to make the competent authority aware of the incident and allow the critical entity to  seek  assistance,  if  required.  Such  a  notification  should  indicate,  where  possible,  the  presumed  cause  of  the incident.  Member States should ensure that the requirement to submit that initial notification does not divert the critical  entity's  resources  from  activities  related  to  incident  handling,  which  should  be  prioritised.  The  initial notification should be followed, where relevant, by a detailed report no later than one month after the incident. The detailed report should complement the initial notification and provide a more complete overview of the incident.
- (34) Standardisation should remain primarily a market-driven process. However, there might still be situations in which it is appropriate to require compliance with specific standards. Member States should, where useful, encourage the use of European and international standards and technical specifications relevant to the security and resilience measures applicable to critical entities.
- (35) While critical entities generally operate as part of an increasingly interconnected network of service provision and infrastructure and often provide essential services in more than one Member State, some of those critical entities are of particular significance for the Union and its internal market because they provide essential services to or in six or more Member States and, therefore, could benefit from specific support at Union level. Rules on advisory missions in respect of such critical entities of particular European significance should therefore be established. Those rules are without prejudice to the rules on supervision and enforcement set out in this Directive.
- (36) On a reasoned request from the Commission or from one or more Member States to or in which the essential service is provided, where additional information is necessary to be able to advise a critical entity in meeting its obligations under  this  Directive  or  to  assess  the  compliance  of a  critical  entity of  particular  European  significance  with  those obligations,  the  Member  State  that  has  identified  a  critical  entity  of  particular  European  significance  as  a  critical entity should provide the Commission with certain information as set out in this Directive. In agreement with the Member  State  that  has  identified  the  critical  entity  of  particular  European  significance  as  a  critical  entity,  the Commission should be able to organise an advisory mission to assess the measures put in place by that entity. In order to ensure that such advisory missions are carried out properly, complementary rules should be established, in particular  on  the  organisation  and  conduct  of  the  advisory  missions,  the  follow-up  actions  to  be  taken  and  the obligations  for  the  critical  entities  of  particular  European  significance  concerned.  The  advisory  mission  should,
- ( 19 ) Council Framework Decision 2009/315/JHA of 26 February 2009 on the organisation and content of the exchange of information extracted from the criminal record between Member States (OJ L 93, , p. 23).
- ( 20 ) Regulation (EU) 2019/816 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 April 2019 establishing a centralised system for the identification  of  Member  States  holding  conviction  information  on  third-country  nationals  and  stateless  persons  (ECRIS-TCN)  to supplement the European Criminal Records Information System and amending Regulation (EU) 2018/1726 (OJ L 135, , p. 1).
- ( 21 ) Regulation (EU) 2018/1862 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 November 2018 on the establishment, operation and  use  of  the  Schengen  Information  System  (SIS)  in  the  field  of  police  cooperation  and  judicial  cooperation  in  criminal  matters, amending and repealing Council Decision 2007/533/JHA, and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1986/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council and Commission Decision 2010/261/EU (OJ L 312, , p. 56). 
without prejudice to the need for the Member State in which the advisory mission is conducted and the critical entity concerned to comply with the rules laid down in this Directive, be conducted subject to the detailed rules of the law of  that  Member  State,  for  instance  on  the  precise  conditions  to  be  fulfilled  in  order  to  obtain  access  to  relevant premises or documents and on judicial redress. Specific expertise required for such advisory missions could, where relevant, be requested through the Emergency Response Coordination Centre established by Decision No 1313/2013/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 22 ).
- (37) In  order  to  support  the  Commission  and  facilitate  cooperation  among  Member  States  and  the  exchange  of information, including best practices, on issues relating to this Directive, a Critical Entities Resilience Group should be  established  as  a  Commission  expert  group.  Member  States  should  endeavour  to  ensure  that  the  designated representatives  of  their  competent  authorities  in  the  Critical  Entities  Resilience  Group  effectively  and  efficiently cooperate,  including  by  designating  representatives  who  hold  security  clearance,  where  appropriate.  The  Critical Entities Resilience Group should begin to perform its tasks as soon as possible, so as to provide additional means for appropriate cooperation during the transposition period of this Directive. The Critical Entities Resilience Group should interact with other relevant sector-specific expert working groups.
- (38) The Critical Entities Resilience Group should cooperate with the Cooperation Group established under Directive (EU) 2022/2555 with a view to supporting a  comprehensive  framework for  cyber  and  non-cyber  resilience  of  critical entities.  The  Critical  Entities  Resilience  Group and  the Cooperation Group established under Directive (EU) 2022/ 2555 should engage in a regular  dialogue  to promote cooperation  between  the  competent  authorities  under  this Directive  and  the  competent  authorities  under  Directive  (EU)  2022/2555  and  to  facilitate  the  exchange  of information, in particular on topics of relevance to both groups.
- (39) In order to achieve the objectives of this Directive and without prejudice to the legal responsibility of Member States and  critical  entities  to  ensure  compliance  with  their  respective  obligations  laid  down  therein,  the  Commission should,  where  it  considers  it  appropriate,  support  competent  authorities  and  critical  entities  with  the  aim  of facilitating  their  compliance  with  their  respective  obligations.  When  providing  support  to  Member  States  and critical entities in the implementation of obligations under this Directive, the Commission should build on existing structures and tools, such as those under the Union Civil Protection Mechanism, established by Decision No 1313/ 2013/EU, and the European Reference Network for Critical Infrastructure Protection. In addition, it should inform Member States about resources available  at  Union  level,  such  as  within  the  Internal  Security  Fund,  established  by Regulation  (EU)  2021/1149  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council ( 23 ),  Horizon  Europe,  established  by Regulation (EU) 2021/695 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 24 ), or other instruments relevant for the resilience of critical entities.
- (40) Member  States  should  ensure  that  their  competent  authorities  have  certain  specific  powers  for  the  proper application  and  enforcement  of  this  Directive  in  relation  to  critical  entities,  where  those  entities  fall  under  their jurisdiction  as  specified  in  this  Directive.  Those  powers  should  include,  in  particular,  the  power  to  conduct inspections  and  audits,  the  power  to  supervise,  the  power  to  require  critical  entities  to  provide  information  and evidence relating to the measures they have taken to comply with their obligations and, where necessary, the power to  issue  orders  to  remedy  identified  infringements.  When  issuing  such  orders,  Member  States  should  not  require measures  which  go  beyond  what  is  necessary  and  proportionate  to  ensure  the  compliance  of  the  critical  entity concerned, taking account of, in particular, the  seriousness  of  the  infringement and  the  economic capacity of  the critical  entity  concerned.  More  generally,  those  powers  should  be  accompanied  by  appropriate  and  effective safeguards to be specified in  national  law in  accordance with  the  Charter of  Fundamental Rights  of  the  European
( 22 ) Decision  No  1313/2013/EU  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  17  December  2013  on  a  Union  Civil  Protection Mechanism (OJ L 347, , p. 924).
( 23 ) Regulation  (EU)  2021/1149  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  7  July  2021  establishing  the  Internal  Security  Fund (OJ L 251, , p. 94).
( 24 ) Regulation  (EU)  2021/695  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  28  April  2021  establishing  Horizon  Europe  -  the Framework  Programme  for  Research  and  Innovation,  laying  down  its  rules  for  participation  and  dissemination,  and  repealing Regulations (EU) No 1290/2013 and (EU) No 1291/2013 (OJ L 170, , p. 1). Union.  When  assessing  the  compliance  of  a  critical  entity  with  its  obligations  as  laid  down  in  this  Directive,  the competent authorities under this Directive should be able to request the competent authorities under Directive (EU) 2022/2555 to exercise their supervisory and enforcement powers in relation to an entity under that Directive that has been identified as a critical entity under  this Directive. The competent authorities under  this Directive and the competent  authorities  under  Directive  (EU)  2022/2555  should  cooperate  and  exchange  information  for  that purpose.
- (41) In order  to apply this Directive in an effective and consistent manner, the power  to adopt acts in accordance with Article  290  TFEU  should  be  delegated  to  the  Commission  to  supplement  this  Directive  by  drawing  up  a  list  of essential  services.  