In addition, the internal market is characterised by fragmentation in respect of the identification of critical entities because relevant sectors and categories of entities are not recognised consistently as critical in all Member States. This Directive should therefore achieve a solid level of harmonisation in terms of the sectors and categories of entities falling within its scope.
- (4) While  certain  sectors  of  the  economy,  such  as  the  energy  and  transport  sectors,  are  already  regulated  by  sectorspecific  Union  legal  acts,  those  legal  acts  contain  provisions  which  relate  only  to  certain  aspects  of  resilience  of entities  operating  in  those  sectors.  In  order  to  address  in  a  comprehensive  manner  the  resilience  of  those  entities that are critical for  the proper functioning of  the internal market, this Directive creates an overarching framework that addresses the resilience of critical entities in respect of all hazards, whether natural or man-made, accidental or intentional.
- (5) The growing interdependencies between infrastructure and sectors are the result of an increasingly cross-border and interdependent  network  of  service  provision  using  key  infrastructure  across  the  Union  in  the  energy,  transport, banking,  drinking  water,  waste  water,  production,  processing  and  distribution  of  food,  health,  space,  financial market  infrastructure  and  digital  infrastructure  sectors  and  in  certain  aspects  of  the  public  administration  sector. The space sector falls within the scope of this Directive with respect to the provision of certain services that depend on  ground-based  infrastructure  owned,  managed  and  operated  either  by  Member  States  or  by  private  parties; consequently,  infrastructure  owned,  managed  or  operated  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  Union  as  part  of  its  space programme does not fall within the scope of this Directive.
In terms of the energy sector and in particular the methods of electricity generation and transmission (in respect of supply of electricity), it is understood that, where deemed appropriate, electricity generation can include electricity transmission parts  of  nuclear  power  plants  but  excludes  the  specifically  nuclear  elements  covered  by  treaties  and Union law, including relevant legal acts of the Union concerning nuclear power. The process for identifying critical entities in the food sector should adequately reflect the nature of the internal market in that sector and the extensive Union rules relating to the general principles and requirements of food law and food safety. Therefore, in order  to ensure that there is a proportionate approach and to adequately reflect the role and importance of those entities at national  level,  critical  entities  should  only  be  identified  among  food  businesses,  whether  for  profit  or  not  and whether  public  or  private,  that  are  engaged  exclusively  in  logistics  and  wholesale  distribution  and  large-scale industrial  production  and  processing  with  a  significant  market  share  as  observed  at  national  level.  Those interdependencies mean that any disruption of essential services, even one which is initially confined to one entity or one sector, can have cascading effects more broadly, potentially resulting in a far-reaching and long-term negative impact on the delivery of services across the internal market. Major crises, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, have shown the vulnerability of our increasingly interdependent societies in the face of high-impact low-probability risks. - (6) The entities involved in the provision of essential services are increasingly subject to diverging requirements imposed under national law. The fact that some Member States have less stringent security requirements on those entities not only  leads  to  various  levels  of  resilience  but  also  risks  negatively  impacting  the  maintenance  of  vital  societal functions or economic activities across the Union and leads to obstacles to the proper functioning of  the internal market. Investors and companies can rely on and trust critical entities that are resilient, and reliability and trust are the  cornerstones of a well-functioning  internal  market.  Similar  types  of entities  are  considered  as  critical  in  some Member States but not in others, and those which are identified as critical are subject to divergent requirements in different  Member  States.  That  results  in  an  additional  and  unnecessary  administrative  burden  for  companies operating across borders, in particular for companies active in Member States with more stringent requirements. A Union  framework would therefore  also  have  the  effect of  levelling  the  playing  field  for  critical  entities  across  the Union.
- (7) It  is  necessary to lay down harmonised minimum rules to ensure the provision of essential services in the internal market,  to  enhance  the  resilience  of  critical  entities  and  to  improve  cross-border  cooperation  between  competent authorities.  It  is  important  that  those  rules  be  future  proof  in  terms  of  their  design  and  implementation  while allowing  for  necessary  flexibility.  It  is  also  crucial  to  improve  the  capacity  of  critical  entities  to  provide  essential services in the face of a diverse set of risks.
- (8) In  order  to  achieve  a  high  level  of  resilience,  Member  States  should  identify critical  entities  that  will  be  subject  to specific requirements and supervision and that will be provided with particular support and guidance in the face of all relevant risks.
- (9) Given  the  importance  of  cybersecurity  for  the  resilience  of  critical  entities  and  in  the  interests  of  consistency,  a coherent approach should be ensured, wherever possible, between this Directive and Directive (EU) 2022/2555 of the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council ( 5 ).  In  light  of  the  higher  frequency  and  particular  characteristics  of cyber risks, Directive (EU) 2022/2555 imposes comprehensive requirements on a large set of entities to ensure their cybersecurity. Given that cybersecurity is addressed sufficiently in Directive (EU) 2022/2555, the matters covered by that  Directive  should  be  excluded  from  the  scope  of  this  Directive,  without  prejudice  to the  particular  regime  for entities in the digital infrastructure sector.
- (10) Where  provisions  of  sector-specific  Union  legal  acts  require  critical  entities  to  take  measures  to  enhance  their resilience, and where  those requirements are recognised by  Member  States as at least equivalent to the corresponding obligations laid down in this Directive, the relevant provisions of this Directive should not apply, so as to avoid duplication and unnecessary burden. In that case, the relevant provisions of such Union legal acts should apply. Where the relevant provisions of this Directive do not apply, the provisions on supervision and enforcement laid down in this Directive should not apply either.
- (11) This  Directive  does  not  affect  the  competence  of  Member  States  and  their  authorities  in  terms  of  administrative autonomy or  their  responsibility for safeguarding national security and defence or  their  power  to safeguard other essential  State  functions,  in  particular  concerning  public  security,  territorial  integrity  and  the  maintenance  of  law and order. The exclusion of public administration entities from the scope of this Directive should apply to entities whose  activities  are  predominantly  carried  out  in  the  areas  of  national  security,  public  security,  defence  or  law enforcement, including the investigation, detection and prosecution of criminal offences.  However,  public administration entities whose activities are only marginally related to those areas should fall within the scope of this Directive. For the purposes of this Directive, entities with regulatory competences are not considered to be carrying out activities in the area of  law enforcement and are therefore not excluded on that ground from the scope of this Directive.  Public  administration  entities  that  are  jointly  established  with  a  third  country  in  accordance  with  an international  agreement  are  excluded  from  the  scope  of  this  Directive.  This  Directive  does  not  apply  to  Member States' diplomatic and consular missions in third countries.
( 5 ) Directive (EU) 2022/2555 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 December 2022 on measures for a high common level of  cybersecurity  across  the  Union,  amending  Regulation (EU)  No  910/2014  and  Directive  (EU)  2018/1972,  and  repealing  Directive (EU) 2016/1148 (NIS 2 Directive) (see page 80 of this Official Journal). Certain  critical  entities  carry  out  activities  in  the  areas  of  national  security,  public  security,  defence  or  law enforcement,  including  the  investigation,  detection  and  prosecution  of  criminal  offences,  or  provide  services exclusively  to  public  administration  entities  that  carry  out  activities  predominantly  in  those  areas.  In  light  of  the Member  States'  responsibility  for  safeguarding  national  security  and  defence,  Member  States  should  be  able  to decide that the obligations on critical entities laid down in this Directive do not apply, in whole or in part, to those critical  entities  if  the  services  they  provide or  the  activities  they perform  are  predominantly related to the areas of national security, public security, defence or law enforcement, including the investigation, detection and prosecution  of  criminal  offences.  Critical  entities  whose  services  or  activities  are  only  marginally  related  to  those areas should fall within the scope of this Directive. No Member State should be required to supply information the disclosure of which would be contrary to the essential interests of its national security. Union or national rules for the protection of classified information and non-disclosure agreements are of relevance.
- (12) In  order  not  to  jeopardise  national  security  or  the  security  and  commercial  interests  of  critical  entities,  sensitive information should be accessed, exchanged and handled prudently and with particular attention to the transmission channels and storage capacities used.
- (13) With a view to ensuring a comprehensive approach to the resilience of critical entities, each Member State should have in place a strategy for enhancing the resilience of critical entities (the 'strategy'). The strategy should set out the strategic objectives and policy measures to be implemented. In the interests of coherence and efficiency, the strategy should  be  designed  to  seamlessly  integrate  existing  policies,  building,  wherever  possible,  upon  relevant  existing national  and  sectoral  strategies,  plans  or  similar  documents.  In  order  to  achieve  a  comprehensive  approach, Member  States  should  ensure  that  their  strategies  provide  for  a  policy  framework  for  enhanced  coordination between the competent authorities under  this Directive and the competent authorities under Directive (EU) 2022/ 2555 in the context of information sharing on cybersecurity risks, cyber threats and cyber incidents and non-cyber risks,  threats  and  incidents  and  in  the  context  of  the  exercise  of  supervisory  tasks.  When  putting  in  place  their strategies, Member States should take due account of the hybrid nature of threats to critical entities.
- (14) Member States should communicate their strategies and substantial updates thereto to the Commission, in particular to  enable  the  Commission  to  assess  the  correct  application  of  this  Directive  as  regards  policy  approaches  to  the resilience  of  critical  entities  at  national  level.  Where  necessary,  the  strategies  could  be  communicated  as  classified information. The Commission should draw up a summary report of the strategies communicated by Member States to  serve  as  a  basis  for  exchanges  to  identify  best  practices  and  issues  of  common  interest  in  the  framework  of  a Critical  Entities  Resilience  Group.  Due  to  the  sensitive  nature  of  the  aggregated  information  included  in  the summary  report,  whether  classified  or  not,  the  Commission  should  manage  the  summary  report  with  the appropriate level of awareness with respect for  the security of critical entities,  Member States and  the Union. The summary  report  and  the  strategies  should  be  safeguarded  against  unlawful  or  malicious  action  and  should  be accessible  only  to authorised  persons in order  to fulfil  the  objectives  of  this  Directive.  The communication  of  the strategies  and  substantial  updates  thereto  should  also  help  the  Commission  to  understand  developments  in approaches to the resilience of critical entities and feed into the monitoring of  the impact and added value of  this Directive, which the Commission is to review periodically.
- (15) The actions of Member States to identify and help ensure the resilience of critical entities should follow a risk-based approach  that  focuses  on  the  entities  most  relevant  for  the  performance  of  vital  societal  functions  or  economic activities.  In  order  to  ensure  such  a  targeted  approach,  each Member State should  carry out,  within  a  harmonised framework, an assessment of the relevant natural and man-made risks, including those of a cross-sectoral or crossborder  nature,  that  could  affect  the  provision  of  essential  services,  including  accidents,  natural  disasters,  public health emergencies such as pandemics and hybrid threats or other antagonistic threats, including terrorist offences, criminal  infiltration  and  sabotage  ('Member  State  risk  assessment').  When  carrying  out  Member  State  risk assessments, Member States should take into account other general or sector-specific risk assessments carried out pursuant  to  other  Union  legal  acts  and  should  consider  the  extent  to  which  sectors  depend  on  one  another, including  on  sectors  in  other  Member  States  and  third  countries.  The  outcome  of  Member  State  risk  assessments should be used for the purposes of identifying critical entities and assisting those entities in meeting their resilience requirements.  This  Directive  applies  only  to  Member  States  and  critical  entities  that  operate  within  the  Union. Nevertheless, the expertise and  knowledge  generated  by  competent  authorities, in particular through  risk assessments,  and  by  the  Commission,  in  particular  through  various  forms  of  support  and  cooperation,  could  be used, where appropriate and in accordance with the applicable legal instruments, for the benefit of third countries, in particular those in the direct neighbourhood of the Union, by feeding into existing cooperation on resilience.
- (16) In order to ensure that all relevant entities are subject to the resilience requirements of this Directive and to reduce divergences in that respect, it is important to lay down harmonised rules allowing for a consistent identification of critical entities across the Union, while also allowing Member States to adequately reflect the role and importance of those  entities  at  national  level.  When  applying  the  criteria  laid  down  in  this  Directive,  each  Member  State  should identify entities that provide one or more essential services and that operate and have critical infrastructure located on its territory. An entity should be considered to operate on the territory of a Member State in which it carries out activities necessary for  the essential service or services in question and in which that entity's critical infrastructure, which is used to provide that service or those services, is located. Where no entity meets those criteria in a Member State,  that  Member State should be under  no obligation to identify a critical entity in the corresponding sector or subsector.  In  the  interests  of  effectiveness,  efficiency,  consistency  and  legal  certainty,  appropriate  rules  should  be established as regards notifying entities that they have been identified as critical entities.
- (17) Member States should submit to the Commission, in a manner that fulfils the objectives of this Directive, a list of essential  services,  the  number  of  critical  entities  identified  for  each  of  the  sectors  and  subsectors  set  out  in  the Annex  and  for  the  essential  service  or  services  that  each  entity  provides  and,  if  applied,  thresholds.  It  should  be possible  to  present  thresholds  as  such  or  in  aggregated  form,  meaning  that  the  information  can  be  averaged  by geographic area, by year, by sector, by subsector or by other means, and can include information on the range of the indicators provided.
- (18) Criteria  should  be  established  to  determine  the  significance  of  a  disruptive  effect  produced  by  an  incident.  Those criteria  should  build  on  the  criteria  set  out  in  Directive  (EU)  2016/1148  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the Council ( 6 ) in  order  to  capitalise  on  the  efforts  carried  out  by  Member  States  to  identify  operators  of  essential services as defined in that Directive and the experience gained in that regard. Major crises, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, have shown the importance of ensuring the security of the supply chain and have demonstrated how its disruption can have a negative economic and societal impact across a large number of sectors and across borders. Therefore, Member States should also consider effects on the supply chain, to the extent possible, when determining the extent to which other sectors and subsectors depend on the essential service provided by a critical entity.
- (19) In  accordance  with  applicable  Union  and  national  law,  including  Regulation  (EU)  2019/452  of  the  European Parliament and of the Council ( 7 ),  which establishes a framework for  the screening of foreign direct investments in the  Union,  the  potential  threat  posed  by  foreign  ownership  of  critical  infrastructure  within  the  Union  is  to  be acknowledged because services, the economy and the free movement and safety of Union citizens depend on the proper functioning of critical infrastructure.
- (20) Directive (EU) 2022/2555 requires entities belonging to the digital infrastructure sector, which might be identified as critical entities under this Directive, to take appropriate and proportionate technical, operational and organisational measures to manage the risks  posed to the security of network and information systems and to notify significant incidents  and  cyber  threats.  Since  threats  to  the  security  of  network  and  information  systems  can  have  different origins,  Directive  (EU)  2022/2555  applies  an  all-hazards  approach  that  includes  the  resilience  of  network  and information systems, as well as the physical components and environment of those systems.
( 6 ) Directive (EU) 2016/1148 of  the European Parliament and of  the Council of 6 July 2016 concerning measures for a high common level of security of network and information systems across the Union (OJ L 194, , p. 1).
( 7 ) Regulation  (EU)  2019/452  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  19  March  2019  establishing  a  framework  for  the screening of foreign direct investments into the Union (OJ L 79 I, , p. 1). Given  that  the  requirements  laid  down  in  Directive  (EU)  2022/2555  in  that  regard  are  at  least  equivalent  to  the corresponding obligations laid down in this Directive, the obligations laid down in Article 11 and Chapters III, IV and VI of this Directive should not apply to entities belonging to the digital infrastructure sector in order  to avoid duplication and unnecessary administrative burden. However, considering the importance of the services provided by entities  belonging  to  the  digital  infrastructure  sector  to  critical  entities  belonging  to  all  other  sectors,  Member States should identify, based on the criteria and using the procedure provided for in this Directive, entities belonging to the digital infrastructure sector as critical entities. Consequently, the strategies, the Member State risk assessments and the support measures set out in Chapter II of this Directive should apply. Member States should be able to adopt or maintain provisions of national law to achieve a higher level of resilience for those critical entities, provided that those provisions are consistent with applicable Union law.
- (21) Union financial services law establishes comprehensive requirements on financial entities to manage all risks  they face, including operational risks, and to ensure business continuity. Such law includes Regulations (EU) No 648/2012 ( 8 ),  (EU) No 575/2013 ( 9 ) and (EU) No 600/2014 ( 10 ) of the European Parliament and of the Council and  Directives  2013/36/EU ( 11 ) and  2014/65/EU ( 12 ) of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council.  That  legal framework  is  complemented  by  Regulation  (EU)  2022/2554  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council ( 13 ), which  lays  down  requirements  applicable  to  financial  entities  to  manage  Information  and  Communication Technology (ICT)  risks,  including  concerning  the  protection  of  physical  ICT  infrastructure.  Since  the  resilience  of those entities is therefore comprehensively covered, Article 11 and Chapters III, IV and VI of  this Directive should not apply to those entities in order to avoid duplication and unnecessary administrative burden.
However, considering the importance of the services provided by entities in the financial sector  to critical entities belonging  to  all  other  sectors,  Member  States  should  identify,  based  on  the  criteria  and  using  the  procedure provided  for  in  this  Directive,  entities  in  the  financial  sector  as  critical  entities.  Consequently,  the  strategies,  the Member  State  risk  assessments  and  the  support  measures  set  out  in  Chapter  II  of  this  Directive  should  apply. Member States should be able to adopt or maintain provisions of national law to achieve a higher level of resilience for those critical entities provided that those provisions are consistent with applicable Union law.
- (22) Member  States  should  designate  or  establish  authorities  competent  to  supervise  the  application  of  and,  where necessary,  enforce  the  rules  of  this  Directive  and  ensure  that  those  authorities  are  adequately  empowered  and resourced.  In  light  of  the  differences  in  national  governance  structures,  in  order  to  safeguard  existing  sectoral arrangements or Union supervisory and regulatory bodies, and in order to avoid duplication, Member States should be able to designate or establish more than one competent authority. Where Member States designate or establish more than one competent authority, they should clearly delineate the respective tasks of the authorities concerned and  ensure  that  they  cooperate  smoothly  and  effectively.  All  competent  authorities  should  also  cooperate  more generally with other relevant authorities, at both Union and national level.
( 8 ) Regulation  (EU)  No  648/2012  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  4  July  2012  on  OTC  derivatives,  central counterparties and trade repositories (OJ L 201, , p. 1).
- ( 9 ) Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on prudential requirements for credit institutions and amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 (OJ L 176, , p. 1).
- ( 10 ) Regulation (EU) No 600/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 on markets in financial instruments and amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 (OJ L 173, , p. 