Some  forms  of  malware  infect  computer  operating  systems  and computer firmware such that common malware controls cannot clean the system and a full reimaging of the operating system software and sometimes the computer firmware is necessary to return to a secure state.
##  Management	of	technical	vulnerabilities
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities               | Security domains                                 |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Identify #Protect       | #Threat_and_ vulnerability_ management | #Governance_and_Ecosys- tem #Protection #Defence |
## Control
Information  about  technical  vulnerabilities  of  information  systems  in  use  should  be  obtained,  the organization's  exposure  to  such  vulnerabilities  should  be  evaluated  and  appropriate  measures should be taken.
## Purpose
To prevent exploitation of technical vulnerabilities.
## Guidance
## Identifying technical vulnerabilities
The organization should have an accurate inventory of assets (see  to ) as a prerequisite for effective  technical  vulnerability  management;  the  inventory  should  include  the  software  vendor, software name, version numbers, current state of deployment (e.g. what software is installed on what systems) and the person(s) within the organization responsible for the software.
To identify technical vulnerabilities, the organization should consider:
- a) defining  and  establishing  the  roles  and  responsibilities  associated  with  technical  vulnerability management,  including  vulnerability  monitoring,  vulnerability  risk  assessment,  updating,  asset tracking and any coordination responsibilities required;
- b) for  software  and  other  technologies  (based  on  the  asset  inventory  list,  see  ),  identifying information  resources  that  will  be  used  for  identifying  relevant  technical  vulnerabilities  and maintaining awareness about them. Updating the list of information resources based on changes in the inventory or when other new or useful resources are found;
- c) requiring  suppliers  of  information  system  (including  their  components)  to  ensure  vulnerability reporting, handling and disclosure, including the requirements in applicable contracts (see  );
- d) using vulnerability scanning tools suitable for the technologies in use to identify vulnerabilities and to verify whether the patching of vulnerabilities was successful;
- e) conducting planned, documented and repeatable penetration tests or vulnerability assessments by competent and authorized persons to support the identification of vulnerabilities. Exercising caution as such activities can lead to a compromise of the security of the system;
- f) tracking  the  usage  of  third-party  libraries  and  source  code  for  vulnerabilities.  This  should  be included in secure coding (see ).
The organization should develop procedures and capabilities to:
- a) detect the existence of vulnerabilities in its products and services including any external component used in these;
- b) receive vulnerability reports from internal or external sources.
The organization should provide a public point of contact as part of a topic-specific policy on vulnerability disclosure so that researchers and others are able to report issues. The organization should establish vulnerability  reporting  procedures,  online  reporting  forms  and  making  use  of  appropriate  threat intelligence or information sharing forums. The organization should also consider bug bounty programs where rewards are offered as an incentive to assist organizations in identifying vulnerabilities in order to  appropriately  remediate  them.  The  organization  should  also  share  information  with  competent industry bodies or other interested parties.
## Evaluating technical vulnerabilities
To evaluate identified technical vulnerabilities, the following guidance should be considered:
- a) analyse and verify reports to determine what response and remediation activity is needed;
- b) once  a  potential  technical  vulnerability  has  been  identified,  identifying  the  associated  risks and  the  actions  to  be  taken.  Such  actions  can  involve  updating  vulnerable  systems  or  applying other controls.
## Taking appropriate measures to address technical vulnerabilities
A software update management process should be implemented to ensure the most up-to-date approved patches and application updates are installed for all authorized software. If changes are necessary, the original software should be retained and the changes applied to a designated copy. All changes should be fully tested and documented, so that they can be reapplied, if necessary, to future software upgrades. If required, the modifications should be tested and validated by an independent evaluation body.
The following guidance should be considered to address technical vulnerabilities:
- a) taking  appropriate  and  timely  action  in  response  to  the  identification  of  potential  technical vulnerabilities;  defining  a  timeline  to  react  to  notifications  of  potentially  relevant  technical vulnerabilities;
- b) depending on how urgently a technical vulnerability needs to be addressed, carrying out the action according to the controls related to change management (see ) or by following information security incident response procedures (see  );
- c) only using updates from legitimate sources (which can be internal or external to the organization);
- d) testing and evaluating updates before they are installed to ensure they are effective and do not result  in  side  effects  that  cannot  be  tolerated  [i.e.  if  an  update  is  available,  assessing  the  risks associated with installing the update (the risks posed by the vulnerability should be compared with the risk of installing the update)];
- e) addressing systems at high risk first;
- f) develop remediation (typically software updates or patches);
- g) test to confirm if the remediation or mitigation is effective;
- h) provide mechanisms to verify the authenticity of remediation;
- i) if no update is available or the update cannot be installed, considering other controls, such as:
- 1) applying any workaround suggested by the software vendor or other relevant sources;
- 2) turning off services or capabilities related to the vulnerability;
- 3) adapting or adding access controls (e.g. firewalls) at network borders (see  to  );
- 4) shielding  vulnerable  systems,  devices  or  applications  from  attack  through  deployment  of suitable traffic filters (sometimes called virtual patching);
- 5) increasing monitoring to detect actual attacks;
- 6) raising awareness of the vulnerability.
For acquired software, if the vendors regularly release information about security updates for their software and provide a facility to install such updates automatically, the organization should decide whether to use the automatic update or not.
## Other considerations
An audit log should be kept for all steps undertaken in technical vulnerability management.
The technical vulnerability management process should be regularly monitored and evaluated in order to ensure its effectiveness and efficiency.
An effective technical vulnerability management process should be aligned with incident management activities,  to  communicate  data  on  vulnerabilities  to  the  incident  response  function  and  provide technical procedures to be carried out in case an incident occurs.
Where the organization uses a cloud service supplied by a third-party cloud service provider, technical vulnerability management of cloud service provider resources should be ensured by the cloud service provider. The cloud service provider's responsibilities for technical vulnerability management should be part of the cloud service agreement and this should include processes for reporting the cloud service provider's actions relating to technical vulnerabilities (see ). For some cloud services, there are respective responsibilities for the cloud service provider and the cloud service customer. For example, the cloud service customer is responsible for vulnerability management of its own assets used for the cloud services.
## Other information
Technical vulnerability management can be viewed as a sub-function of change management and as such can take advantage of the change management processes and procedures (see ).
There is a possibility that an update does not address the problem adequately and has negative side effects.  Also,  in  some  cases,  uninstalling  an  update  cannot  be  easily  achieved  once  the  update  has been applied.
If adequate testing of the updates is not possible (e.g. because of costs or lack of resources) a delay in updating can be considered to evaluate the associated risks, based on the experience reported by other users. The use of ISO/IEC 27031 can be beneficial.
Where  software  patches  or  updates  are  produced,  the  organization  can  consider  providing  an automated update process where these updates are installed on affected systems or products without the need for intervention by the customer or the user. If an automated update process is offered, it can allow the customer or user to choose an option to turn off the automatic update or control the timing of the installation of the update.
Where the vendor provides an automated update process and the updates can be installed on affected systems or products without the need for intervention, the organization determines if it applies the automated process or not. One reason for not electing for automated update is to retain control over when the update is performed. For example, a software used for a business operation cannot be updated until the operation has completed.
A weakness with vulnerability scanning is that it is possible it does not fully account for defence in depth: two countermeasures that are always invoked in sequence can have vulnerabilities that are masked by strengths in the other. The composite countermeasure is not vulnerable, whereas a vulnerability scanner can report that both components are vulnerable. The organization should therefore take care in reviewing and acting on vulnerability reports.
Many organizations supply software, systems, products and services not only within the organization but  also  to  interested  parties  such  as  customers,  partners  or  other  users.  These  software,  systems, products and services can have information security vulnerabilities that affect the security of users.
Organizations  can  release  remediation  and  disclose  information  about  vulnerabilities  to  users (typically through a public advisory) and provide appropriate information for software vulnerability database services.
For  more  information  relating  to  the  management  of  technical  vulnerabilities  when  using  cloud computing, see the ISO/IEC 19086 series and ISO/IEC 27017.
ISO/IEC  29147  provides  detailed  information  on  receiving  vulnerability  reports  and  publishing vulnerability advisories. ISO/IEC 30111 provides detailed information about handling and resolving reported vulnerabilities.
##  Configuration	management
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities   | Security domains   |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|--------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #Secure_configuration      | #Protection        |
## Control
Configurations, including security configurations, of hardware, software, services and networks should be established, documented, implemented, monitored and reviewed.
## Purpose
To  ensure  hardware,  software,  services  and  networks  function  correctly  with  required  security settings, and configuration is not altered by unauthorized or incorrect changes.
## Guidance
## General
The organization should define and implement processes and tools to enforce the defined configurations (including security configurations) for hardware, software, services (e.g. 