Supplier  relationships  for  cloud  services  are  covered  by  ISO/IEC  27036-4  and  cloud service agreements and their contents are dealt with in the ISO/IEC 19086 series, with security and privacy specifically covered by ISO/IEC 19086-4.
##  Information security incident management planning and preparation
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities                             | Security domains   |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|--------------------|
| #Corrective    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Respond #Recover        | #Governance #Information_securi- ty_event_management | #Defence           |
## Control
The organization should plan and prepare for managing information security incidents by defining, establishing  and  communicating  information  security  incident  management  processes,  roles  and responsibilities.
## Purpose
To ensure quick, effective, consistent and orderly response to information security incidents, including communication on information security events.
## Guidance
## Roles and responsibilities
The organization should establish appropriate information security incident management processes. Roles and responsibilities to carry out the incident management procedures should be determined and effectively communicated to the relevant internal and external interested parties.
The following should be considered:
- a) establishing  a  common  method  for  reporting  information  security  events  including  point  of contact (see  );
- b) establishing  an  incident  management  process  to  provide  the  organization  with  capability  for managing  information  security  incidents  including  administration,  documentation,  detection, triage, prioritization, analysis, communication and coordinating interested parties;
- c) establishing an incident response process to provide the organization with capability for assessing, responding to and learning from information security incidents;
- d) only allowing competent personnel to handle the issues related to information security incidents within the organization. Such personnel should be provided with procedure documentation and periodic training;
- e) establishing  a  process  to  identify  required  training,  certification  and  ongoing  professional development for incident response personnel.
## Incident management procedures
The objectives for information security incident management should be agreed with management and it should be ensured that those responsible for information security incident management understand the  organization's  priorities  for  handling  information  security  incidents  including  resolution  time frame  based  on  potential  consequences  and  severity.  Incident  management  procedures  should  be implemented to meet these objectives and priorities.
Management  should  ensure  that  an  information  security  incident  management  plan  is  created considering different scenarios and procedures are developed and implemented for the following activities:
- a) evaluation of information security events according to criteria for what constitutes an information security incident;
- b) monitoring (see  and ), detecting (see ), classifying (see ), analysing and reporting (see  ) of information security events and incidents (by human or automatic means);
- c) managing information security incidents to conclusion, including response and escalation (see ), according to the type and the category of the incident, possible activation of crisis management and activation of continuity plans, controlled recovery from an incident and communication to internal and external interested parties;
- d) coordination with internal and external interested parties such as authorities, external interest groups and forums, suppliers and clients (see  and  );
- e) logging incident management activities;
- f) handling of evidence (see  );
- g) root cause analysis or post-mortem procedures;
- h) identification of lessons learned and any improvements to the incident management procedures or information security controls in general that are required.
## Reporting procedures
Reporting procedures should include:
- a) actions  to  be  taken  in  case  of  an  information  security  event  (e.g.  noting  all  pertinent  details immediately such as malfunction occurring and messages on screen, immediately reporting to the point of contact and only taking coordinated actions);
- b) use  of  incident  forms  to  support  personnel  to  perform  all  necessary  actions  when  reporting information security incidents;
- c) suitable feedback processes to ensure that those persons reporting information security events are notified, to the extent possible, of outcomes after the issue has been addressed and closed;
- d) creation of incident reports.
Any  external  requirements  on  reporting  of  incidents  to  relevant  interested  parties  within  the defined time frame (e.g. breach notification requirements to regulators) should be considered when implementing incident management procedures.
## Other information
Information security incidents can transcend organizational and national boundaries. To respond to such incidents, it is beneficial to coordinate response and share information about these incidents with external organizations as appropriate.
Detailed guidance on information security incident management is provided in the ISO/IEC 27035 series.
##  Assessment and decision on information security events
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities                 | Security domains   |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|------------------------------------------|--------------------|
| #Detective     | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Detect #Respond         | #Information_securi- ty_event_management | #Defence           |
## Control
The organization should assess information security events and decide if they are to be categorized as information security incidents.
## Purpose
To ensure effective categorization and prioritization of information security events.
## Guidance
A categorization and prioritization scheme of information security incidents should be agreed for the identification of the consequences and priority of an incident. The scheme should include the criteria to categorize events as information security incidents. The point of contact should assess each information security event using the agreed scheme.
Personnel  responsible  for  coordinating  and  responding  to  information  security  incidents  should perform the assessment and make a decision on information security events.
Results of the assessment and decision should be recorded in detail for the purpose of future reference and verification.
