Security  testing  should  be  conducted  against  a  set  of  requirements,  which  can  be  expressed  as functional or non-functional. Security testing should include testing of:
- a) security  functions  [e.g.  user  authentication  (see  ),  access  restriction  (see  )  and  use  of cryptography (see  )];
- b) secure coding (see  );
- c) secure configurations (see ,   and  )  including that of operating systems, firewalls and other security components.
Test plans should be determined using a set of criteria. The extent of testing should be in proportion to the importance, nature of the system and the potential impact of the change being introduced. The test plan should include:
- a) detailed schedule of activities and tests;
- b) inputs and expected outputs under a range of conditions;
- c) criteria to evaluate the results;
- d) decision for further actions as necessary.
The organization can leverage automated tools, such as code analysis tools or vulnerability scanners, and should verify the remediation of security related defects.
For  in-house  developments,  such  tests  should  initially  be  performed  by  the  development  team. Independent acceptance testing should then be undertaken to ensure that the system works as expected and only as expected (see ). The following should be considered:
- a) performing code review activities as a relevant element for testing for security flaws, including unanticipated inputs and conditions;
- b) performing vulnerability scanning to identify insecure configurations and system vulnerabilities;
- c) performing penetration testing to identify insecure code and design.
For outsourced development and purchasing components, an acquisition process should be followed. Contracts with the supplier should address the identified security requirements (see ). Products and services should be evaluated against these criteria before acquisition.
Testing should be performed in a test environment that matches the target production environment as closely as possible to ensure that the system does not introduce vulnerabilities to the organization's environment and that the tests are reliable (see ).
## Other information
Multiple test environments can be established, which can be used for different kinds of testing (e.g. functional  and  performance  testing).  These  different  environments  can  be  virtual,  with  individual configurations to simulate a variety of operating environments.
Testing and monitoring of test environments, tools and technologies also needs to be considered to ensure  effective  testing.  