If the application owner can access scripts by direct remote access to the server, so in principle can an attacker. Webservers should be configured to prevent directory browsing in such cases.
Application code is best designed on the assumption that it is always subject to attack, through error or malicious action. In addition, critical applications can be designed to be tolerant of internal faults. For example, the output from a complex algorithm can be checked to ensure that it lies within safe bounds before the data is used in an application such as a safety or financial critical application. The code that performs the boundary checks is simple and therefore much easier to prove correctness.
Some web applications are susceptible to a variety of vulnerabilities that are introduced by poor design and coding, such as database injection and cross-site scripting attacks. In these attacks, requests can be manipulated to abuse the webserver functionality.
More information on ICT security evaluation can be found in the ISO/IEC 15408 series.
##  Security testing in development and acceptance
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities                                                               | Security domains   |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Identify                | #Application_security #Information_securi- ty_assurance #System_and_net- work_security | #Protection        |
## Control
Security testing processes should be defined and implemented in the development life cycle.
## Purpose
To validate if information security requirements are met when applications or code are deployed to the production environment.
## Guidance
New information systems, upgrades and new versions should be thoroughly tested and verified during the  development  processes.  Security  testing  should  be  an  integral  part  of  the  testing  for  systems or components.
