## Other information
When confidential information on storage media is not encrypted, additional physical protection of the storage media should be considered.
##  Supporting utilities
| Control type           | Information security properties   | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities   | Security domains   |
|------------------------|-----------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|--------------------|
| #Preventive #Detective | #Integrity #Availability          | #Protect #Detect         | #Physical_security         | #Protection        |
## Control
Information processing facilities should be protected from power failures and other disruptions caused by failures in supporting utilities.
## Purpose
To prevent loss, damage or compromise of information and other associated assets, or interruption to the organization's operations due to failure and disruption of supporting utilities.
## Guidance
Organizations  depend  on  utilities  (e.g.  electricity,  telecommunications,  water  supply,  gas,  sewage, ventilation  and  air  conditioning)  to  support  their  information  processing  facilities.  Therefore,  the organization should:
- a) ensure equipment supporting the utilities is configured, operated and maintained in accordance with the relevant manufacturer's specifications;
- b) ensure utilities are appraised regularly for their capacity to meet business growth and interactions with other supporting utilities;
- c) ensure equipment supporting the utilities is inspected and tested regularly to ensure their proper functioning;
- d) if necessary, raise alarms to detect utilities malfunctions;
- e) if necessary, ensure utilities have multiple feeds with diverse physical routing;
- f) ensure equipment supporting the utilities is on a separate network from the information processing facilities if connected to a network;
- g) ensure equipment supporting the utilities is connected to the internet only when needed and only in a secure manner.
Emergency lighting and communications should be provided. Emergency switches and valves to cut off  power, water, gas or other utilities should be located near emergency exits or equipment rooms. Emergency contact details should be recorded and available to personnel in the event of an outage.
## Other information
Additional redundancy for network connectivity can be obtained by means of multiple routes from more than one utility provider.
## 	Cabling	security
| Control type   | Information security properties   | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities   | Security domains   |
|----------------|-----------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|--------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Availability    | #Protect                 | #Physical_security         | #Protection        |
## Control
Cables carrying power, data or supporting information services should be protected from interception, interference or damage.
## Purpose
To  prevent  loss,  damage,  theft  or  compromise  of  information  and  other  associated  assets  and interruption to the organization's operations related to power and communications cabling.
## Guidance
The following guidelines for cabling security should be considered:
- a) power  and  telecommunications  lines  into  information  processing  facilities  being  underground where possible, or subject to adequate alternative protection, such as floor cable protector and utility pole; if cables are underground, protecting them from accidental cuts (e.g. with armoured conduits or signals of presence);
- b) segregating power cables from communications cables to prevent interference;
- c) for sensitive or critical systems, further controls to consider include:
- 1) installation  of  armoured  conduit  and  locked  rooms  or  boxes  and  alarms  at  inspection  and termination points;
- 2) use of electromagnetic shielding to protect the cables;
- 3) periodical  technical  sweeps  and  physical  inspections  to  detect  unauthorized  devices  being attached to the cables;
- 4) controlled access to patch panels and cable rooms (e.g. 