Electromagnetic shielding should also be considered as appropriate;
- d) not making directories, internal telephone books and online accessible maps identifying locations of confidential information processing facilities readily available to any unauthorized person.
## Other information
No other information.
##  Physical security monitoring
| Control type           | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities   | Security domains     |
|------------------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------|
| #Preventive #Detective | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect #Detect         | #Physical_security         | #Protection #Defence |
## Control
Premises should be continuously monitored for unauthorized physical access.
## Purpose
To detect and deter unauthorized physical access.
## Guidance
Physical premises should be monitored by surveillance systems, which can include guards, intruder alarms, video monitoring systems such as closed-circuit television and physical security information management software either managed internally or by a monitoring service provider.
Access to buildings that house critical systems should be continuously monitored to detect unauthorized access or suspicious behaviour by:
- a) installing video monitoring systems such as closed-circuit television to view and record access to sensitive areas within and outside an organization's premises;
- b) installing, according to relevant applicable standards, and periodically testing contact, sound or motion detectors to trigger an intruder alarm such as:
- 1) installing contact detectors that trigger an alarm when a contact is made or broken in any place where a contact can be made or broken (such as windows and doors and underneath objects) to be used as a panic alarm;
- 2) motion detectors based on infra-red technology which trigger an alarm when an object passes through their field of view;
- 3) installing  sensors  sensitive  to  the  sound  of  breaking  glass  which  can  be  used  to  trigger  an alarm to alert security personnel;
- c) using  those  alarms  to  cover  all  external  doors  and  accessible  windows.  Unoccupied  areas should be alarmed at all times; cover should also be provided for other areas (e.g. computer or communications rooms).
The  design  of  monitoring  systems  should  be  kept  confidential  because  disclosure  can  facilitate undetected break-ins.
Monitoring systems should be protected from unauthorized access in order to prevent surveillance information,  such  as  video  feeds,  from  being  accessed  by  unauthorized  persons  or  systems  being disabled remotely.
The alarm system control panel should be placed in an alarmed zone and, for safety alarms, in a place that allows an easy exit route for the person who sets the alarm. The control panel and the detectors should  have  tamperproof  mechanisms.  The  system  should  regularly  be  tested  to  ensure  that  it  is working as intended, particularly if its components are battery powered.
Any monitoring and recording  mechanism should be  used  taking  into  consideration  local  laws  and regulations including data protection and PII protection legislation, especially regarding the monitoring of personnel and recorded video retention periods.
## Other information
No other information.
##  Protecting against physical and environmental threats
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities   | Security domains   |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|--------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #Physical_security         | #Protection        |
## Control
Protection against physical and environmental threats, such as natural disasters and other intentional or unintentional physical threats to infrastructure should be designed and implemented.
## Purpose
To prevent or reduce the consequences of events originating from physical and environmental threats.
## Guidance
Risk  assessments  to  identify  the  potential  consequences  of  physical  and  environmental  threats should be performed prior to beginning critical operations at a physical site, and at regular intervals. Necessary safeguards should be implemented and changes to threats should be monitored. Specialist advice should be obtained on how to manage risks arising from physical and environmental threats such as fire, flood, earthquake, explosion, civil unrest, toxic waste, environmental emissions and other forms of natural disaster or disaster caused by human beings.
Physical premises location and construction should take account of:
- a) local topography, such as appropriate elevation, bodies of water and tectonic fault lines;
- b) urban threats, such as locations with a high profile for attracting political unrest, criminal activity or terrorist attacks.
Based on risk assessment results, relevant physical and environmental threats should be identified and appropriate controls considered in the following contexts as examples:
- a) fire:  installing  and  configuring  systems  able  to  detect  fires  at  an  early  stage  to  send  alarms  or trigger fire suppression systems in order to prevent fire damage to storage media and to related information processing systems. Fire suppression should be performed using the most appropriate substance with regard to the surrounding environment (e.g. gas in confined spaces);
- b) flooding:  installing  systems  able  to  detect  flooding  at  an  early  stage  under  the  floors  of  areas containing storage media or information processing systems. Water pumps or equivalent means should be readily made available in case flooding occurs;
- c) electrical  surges:  adopting  systems  able  to  protect  both  server  and  client  information  systems against electrical surges or similar events to minimize the consequences of such events;
- d) explosives and weapons: performing random inspections for the presence of explosives or weapons on personnel, vehicles or goods entering sensitive information processing facilities.
## Other information
Safes or other forms of secure storage facilities can protect information stored therein against disasters such as a fire, earthquake, flood or explosion.
Organizations  can  consider  the  concepts  of  crime  prevention  through  environmental  design  when designing the controls to secure their environment and reduce urban threats. For example, instead of using bollards, statues or water features can serve as both a feature and a physical barrier.
