documents fallen behind drawers or furniture).
## Other information
No other information.
##  Equipment siting and protection
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities             | Security domains   |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #Physical_security #Asset_management | #Protection        |
## Control
Equipment should be sited securely and protected.
## Purpose
To reduce the risks from physical and environmental threats, and from unauthorized access and damage.
## Guidance
The following guidelines should be considered to protect equipment:
- a) siting equipment to minimize unnecessary access into work areas and to avoid unauthorized access;
- b) carefully positioning information processing facilities handling sensitive data to reduce the risk of information being viewed by unauthorized persons during their use;
- c) adopting controls to minimize the risk of potential physical and environmental threats [e.g. theft, fire, explosives, smoke, water (or water supply failure), dust, vibration, chemical effects, electrical supply interference, communications interference, electromagnetic radiation and vandalism];
- d) establishing guidelines for eating, drinking and smoking in proximity to information processing facilities;
- e) monitoring environmental conditions, such as temperature and humidity, for conditions which can adversely affect the operation of information processing facilities;
- f) applying lightning protection to all buildings and fitting lightning protection filters to all incoming power and communications lines;
- g) considering the use of special protection methods, such as keyboard membranes, for equipment in industrial environments;
- h) protecting  equipment  processing  confidential  information  to  minimize  the  risk  of  information leakage due to electromagnetic emanation;
- i) physically separating information processing facilities managed by the organization from those not managed by the organization.
## Other information
No other information.
##  Security of assets off-premises
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities             | Security domains   |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #Physical_security #Asset_management | #Protection        |
## Control
Off-site assets should be protected.
## Purpose
To prevent loss, damage, theft or compromise of off-site devices and interruption to the organization's operations.
## Guidance
Any device used outside the organization's premises which stores or processes information (e.g. mobile device), including devices owned by the organization and devices owned privately and used on behalf of the organization [bring your own device (BYOD)] needs protection. The use of these devices should be authorized by management.
The following guidelines  should  be  considered  for  the  protection  of  devices  which  store  or  process information outside the organization's premises:
- a) not leaving equipment  and  storage  media  taken  off premises  unattended  in public and unsecured places;
- b) observing manufacturers' instructions for protecting equipment at all times (e.g. protection against exposure to strong electromagnetic fields, water, heat, humidity, dust);
- c) when  off-premises  equipment  is  transferred  among  different  individuals  or  interested  parties, maintaining a log that defines the chain of custody for the equipment including at least names and organizations of those who are responsible for the equipment. Information that does not need to be transferred with the asset should be securely deleted before the transfer;
- d) where necessary and practical, requiring authorization for equipment and media to be removed from the organization's premises and keeping a record of such removals in order to maintain an audit trail (see  );
- e) protecting against viewing information on a device (e.g. mobile or laptop) on public transport, and the risks associated with shoulder surfing;
- f) implementing location tracking and ability for remote wiping of devices.
Permanent  installation  of  equipment  outside  the  organization's  premises  [such  as  antennas  and automated teller machines (ATMs)] can be subject to higher risk of damage, theft or eavesdropping. 