- 3. Member  States  shall  assess  whether  the  clinical  investigation  is  designed  in  such  a  way  that  potential  remaining risks  to  subjects  or  third  persons,  after  risk  minimization,  are  justified,  when  weighed  against  the  clinical  benefits  to  be expected. They shall, while taking into account applicable CS or harmonised standards, examine in particular:
- (a)   the  demonstration  of  compliance  of  the  investigational  device(s)  with  the  applicable  general  safety  and  performance requirements, apart from the aspects covered by the clinical investigation, and whether, with regard to those aspects, every  precaution  has  been  taken  to  protect  the  health  and  safety  of  the  subjects.  This  includes,  where  appropriate, assurance of technical and biological safety testing and pre-clinical evaluation;
- (b)   whether  the  risk-minimisation  solutions  employed  by  the  sponsor  are  described  in  harmonised  standards  and,  in those  cases  where  the  sponsor  does  not  use  harmonised  standards,  whether  the  risk-minimisation  solutions  provide a level of protection that is equivalent to that provided by harmonised standards;
- (c)   whether  the  measures  planned  for  the  safe  installation,  putting  into  service  and  maintenance  of  the  investigational device are adequate;
- (d)   the reliability  and  robustness  of the data  generated  in the clinical investigation, taking  account  of  statistical approaches, design of the investigation and methodological aspects, including sample size, comparator  and endpoints;
- (e)   whether  the requirements of Annex XV are met;
- (f)   in  the  case  of  devices  for  sterile  use,  evidence  of  the  validation  of  the  manufacturer's  sterilisation  procedures  or information on the reconditioning and sterilisation procedures which have to be conducted by the investigation site;
- (g)   the  demonstration  of  the  safety,  quality  and  usefulness  of  any  components  of  animal  or  human  origin  or  of substances, which may be considered medicinal products in accordance with Directive 2001/83/EC.
- 4. Member States shall refuse the authorisation of the clinical investigation if:
- (a)   the  application dossier submitted pursuant to Article 70(1) remains incomplete;
- (b)   the  device  or  the  submitted  documents,  especially  the  investigation  plan  and  the  investigator's  brochure,  do  not correspond  to  the  state  of  scientific  knowledge,  and  the  clinical  investigation,  in  particular,  is  not  suitable  for providing evidence for  the safety, performance characteristics or benefit of the device on subjects or patients,
- (c)   the  requirements of Article 62 are not met, or
- (d)   any assessment under paragraph 3 is negative.
Member States shall provide for an appeal procedure in respect of a refusal pursuant to the first subparagraph.
## Article 72
## Conduct of a clinical investigation
- 1. The  sponsor  and  the  investigator  shall  ensure  that  the  clinical  investigation  is  conducted  in  accordance  with  the approved clinical investigation plan.
- 2. In  order  to verify  that  the  rights,  safety  and  well-being  of  subjects  are  protected,  that  the  reported  data  are  reliable and  robust,  and  that  the  conduct  of  the  clinical  investigation  is  in  compliance  with  the  requirements  of  this  Regulation, the  sponsor  shall  ensure  adequate  monitoring  of  the  conduct  of  a  clinical  investigation.  The  extent  and  nature  of  the monitoring shall be determined by the sponsor on the basis of an assessment that takes into consideration all character­ istics of  the clinical investigation including the following:
- (a)   the  objective and methodology of the clinical investigation; and
- (b)   the  degree of deviation of  the intervention from normal clinical practice. - 3. All clinical investigation information  shall be recorded, processed, handled, and  stored by the sponsor  or investigator,  as  applicable,  in  such  a  way  that  it  can  be  accurately  reported,  interpreted  and  verified  while  the  confiden­ tiality  of  records  and  the  personal  data  of  the  subjects  remain  protected  in  accordance  with  the  applicable  law  on personal data protection.
- 4. Appropriate  technical  and  organisational  measures  shall  be  implemented  to  protect  information  and  personal  data processed against unauthorised or unlawful access, disclosure, dissemination, alteration, or destruction or accidental loss, in particular  where the processing involves transmission over a network.
- 5. Member  States  shall  inspect,  at  an  appropriate  level,  investigation  site(s)  to  check  that  clinical  investigations  are conducted in accordance with the requirements of this Regulation and with the approved investigation plan.
- 6. The  sponsor  shall  establish  a  procedure  for  emergency  situations  which  enables  the  immediate  identification  and, where necessary, an immediate recall of the devices used in the investigation.
## Article 73
## Electronic system on clinical investigations
- 1. The  Commission  shall,  in  collaboration  with  the  Member  States,  set  up,  manage  and  maintain  an  electronic system:
- (a)   to create the single identification numbers for clinical investigations referred to in Article 70(1);
- (b)   to  be  used  as  an  entry  point  for  the  submission  of  all  applications  or  notifications  for  clinical  investigations  referred to in Articles 70, 74, 75 and 78 and for all other submission of data, or processing of data in this context;
- (c)   for  the  exchange  of  information  relating  to  clinical  investigations  in  accordance  with  this  Regulation  between  the Member  States  and  between  them  and  the  Commission  including  the  exchange  of  information  referred  to  in Articles 70 and 76;
- (d)   for  information  to  be  provided  by  the  sponsor  in  accordance  with  Article  77,  including  the  clinical  investigation report and its summary as required in paragraph 5 of that Article;
- (e)   for  reporting on serious adverse events and device deficiencies and related updates referred to in Article 80.
- 2. When setting  up the  electronic  system referred  in  paragraph  1  of  this  Article,  the  Commission  shall  ensure  that  it is  interoperable  with  the  EU  database  for  clinical  trials  on  medicinal  products  for  human  use  set  up  in  accordance  with Article  81  of  Regulation  (EU)  No  536/2014  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  ( 1 )  as  concerns  combined clinical investigations of devices with a clinical trial under  that Regulation.
- 3. The  information  referred  to  in  point  (c)  of  paragraph  1  shall  only  be  accessible  to  the  Member  States  and  the Commission. The information  referred  to in  the  other  points  of  that  paragraph  shall  be  accessible  to  the  public,  unless, for all or  parts of  that information, confidentiality of  the information is justified on any of  the following grounds:
- (a)   protection of personal data in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 45/2001;
- (b)   protection  of  commercially  confidential  information,  especially  in  the  investigators  brochure,  in  particular  through taking  into  account  the  status  of  the  conformity  assessment  for  the  device,  unless  there  is  an  overriding  public interest in disclosure;
- (c)   effective  supervision of  the conduct of  the clinical investigation by the Member State(s) concerned.
- 4. No personal data of subjects shall be publicly available.
- 5. The  user  interface  of  the  electronic  system  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  shall  be  available  in  all  official  languages  of the Union.
- ( 1 ) Regulation (EU) No 536/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on clinical trials on medicinal products for human use, and repealing Directive 2001/20/EC (OJ L 158, , p. 1).
## Article 74
## Clinical investigations regarding devices bearing the CE marking
- 1. Where  a  clinical  investigation  is  to  be  conducted  to  further  assess,  within  the  scope  of  its  intended  purpose, a  device  which  already  bears  the  CE  marking  in  accordance  with  Article  20(1),  ('PMCF  investigation'),  and  where  the investigation  would  involve submitting subjects to  procedures additional to  those  performed  under the  normal conditions of use of  the device and those additional procedures are invasive or burdensome, the sponsor shall notify the Member States concerned  at  least  30  days  prior  to  its  commencement  by  means  of  the  electronic  system  referred  to  in Article  73.  The  sponsor  shall  include  the  documentation  referred  to  in  Chapter  II  of  Annex  XV  as  part  of  the notification.  Points  (b)  to  (k)  and  (m)  of  Article  62(4),  Article  75,  Article  76,  Article  77,  Article  80(5)  and  the  relevant provisions of Annex XV shall apply to PMCF investigations.
- 2. Where  a  clinical  investigation  is  to  be  conducted  to  assess,  outside  the  scope  of  its  intended  purpose,  a  device which already bears the CE marking in accordance with Article 20(1), Articles 62 to 81 shall apply.
## Article 75
## Substantial modifications to clinical investigations
- 1. If  a  sponsor  intends  to  introduce  modifications  to  a  clinical  investigation  that  are  likely  to  have  a  substantial impact on the safety,  health  or  rights  of  the  subjects  or  on  the  robustness  or  reliability  of  the  clinical  data  generated  by the  investigation,  it  shall  notify,  within  one  week,  by  means  of  the  electronic  system  referred  to  in  Article  73  the Member  State(s)  in  which  the  clinical  investigation  is  being  or  is  to  be  conducted  of  the  reasons  for  and  the  nature  of those  modifications.  The  sponsor  shall  include  an  updated  version  of  the  relevant  documentation  referred  to  in Chapter II of Annex XV as part of the notification. Changes to the relevant documentation shall be clearly identifiable.
- 2. The  Member  State  shall  assess  any  substantial  modification  to  the  clinical  investigation  in  accordance  with  the procedure laid down in Article 71.
- 3. The  sponsor  may  implement  the  modifications  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  at  the  earliest  38  days  after  the notification referred to in that paragraph, unless:
- (a)   the  Member  State  in  which  the  clinical  investigation  is  being  or  is  to  be  conducted  has  notified  the  sponsor  of  its refusal  based  on  the  grounds  referred  to  in  Article  71(4)  or  on  considerations  of  public  health,  subject  and  user safety or health, of public policy, or
- (b)   an  ethics  committee in that Member State has issued a negative opinion in relation to the substantial modification to the clinical investigation, which, in accordance with national law, is valid for  that entire Member State.
- 4. The Member State(s)  concerned  may extend  the  period  referred  to  in  paragraph  3  by  a  further  seven  days,  for  the purpose of consulting with experts.
## Article 76
## Corrective measures to be taken by Member States and information exchange between Member States
- 1. Where a Member State in which a clinical investigation is being or  is to be conducted has grounds for considering that  the  requirements  set  out  in  this  Regulation  are  not  met,  it  may  take  at  least  any  of  the  following  measures  on  its territory:
- (a)   revoke the authorisation for  the clinical investigation;
- (b)   suspend or  terminate the clinical investigation;
- (c)   require the sponsor  to modify any aspect of the clinical investigation.
- 2. Before  the  Member  State  concerned  takes  any  of  the  measures  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  it  shall,  except  where immediate  action  is  required,  ask  the  sponsor  or  the  investigator  or  both  for  their  opinion.  That  opinion  shall  be delivered within seven days. - 3. Where  a  Member  State  has  taken  a  measure  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  of  this  Article  or  has  refused  a  clinical investigation,  or  has  been  notified  by  the  sponsor  of  the  early  termination  of  a  clinical  investigation  on  safety  grounds, that Member State shall communicate the corresponding decision and the grounds therefor  to all Member States and the Commission by means of the electronic system referred to in Article 73.
- 4. Where  an  application  is  withdrawn  by  the  sponsor  prior  to  a  decision  by  a  Member  State,  that  information  shall be made available through the electronic system referred to in Article 73 to all Member States and the Commission.
## Article 77
## Information from the sponsor at the end of a clinical investigation or  in the event of a temporary halt or early termination
- 1. If  the  sponsor  has  temporarily  halted a  clinical  investigation  or  has  terminated  a  clinical  investigation  early,  it  shall inform  within  15  days  the  Member  State  in  which  that  clinical  investigation  has  been  temporarily  halted  or  terminated early,  through  the  electronic  system  referred  to  in  Article  73,  of  the  temporary  halt  or  early  termination,  providing a  justification.  In  the  event  that  the  sponsor  has  temporarily  halted  or  terminated  early  the  clinical  investigation  on safety  grounds,  it  shall  inform  all  Member  States  in  which  that  clinical  investigation  is  being  conducted  thereof  within 24 hours.
- 2. The end of a  clinical  investigation  shall  be  deemed  to  coincide  with  the  last  visit  of  the  last  subject  unless  another point in time for such end is set out in the clinical investigation plan.
- 3. The  sponsor  shall  notify  each  Member  State  in  which  a  clinical  investigation  was  being  conducted  of  the  end  of that  clinical  investigation  in  that  Member  State. That  notification  shall  be  made  within  15  days  of  the  end  of  the  clinical investigation in relation to that Member State.
- 4. If  an  investigation  is  conducted  in  more  than  one  Member  State,  the  sponsor  shall  notify  all  Member  States  in which  that  clinical  investigation  was  conducted  of  the  end  of  the  clinical  investigation  in  all  Member  States.  That notification shall be made within 15 days of that end of the clinical investigation.
- 5. Irrespective  of  the  outcome  of  the  clinical  investigation,  within  one  year  of  the  end  of  the  clinical  investigation  or within three months of the early termination or  temporary halt, the sponsor shall submit to the Member States in which a  clinical  investigation  was  conducted  a  clinical  investigation  report  as  referred  to  in  Section    of  Chapter  I  and Section 7 of Chapter III of Annex XV.
The  clinical  investigation  report  shall  be  accompanied  by  a  summary  presented  in  terms  that  are  easily  understandable to the intended user. Both the report and summary shall be submitted by the sponsor by means of the electronic system referred to in Article 73.
Where,  for  scientific  reasons,  it  is  not  possible  to  submit  the  clinical  investigation  report  within  one  year  of  the  end  of the investigation, it shall be submitted as soon as it is available. In such case, the clinical investigation plan referred to in Section 3 of Chapter II of Annex XV shall specify when the results of  the clinical investigation are going to be available, together  with a justification.
- 6. The  Commission  shall  issue  guidelines  regarding  the  content  and  structure  of  the  summary  of  the  clinical  investi­ gation report.
In  addition,  the  Commission  may  issue  guidelines  for  the  formatting  and  sharing  of  raw  data,  for  cases  where  the sponsor decides to share raw data on a voluntary basis.  Those guidelines  may  take  as a  basis  and  adapt,  where  possible, existing guidelines for sharing of raw data in the field of clinical investigations.
- 7. The summary and the clinical  investigation report  referred  to in  paragraph  5  of  this  Article  shall  become  publicly accessible  through  the  electronic  system  referred  to  in  Article  73,  at  the  latest  when  the  device  is  registered  in accordance  with  Article  29  and  before  it  is  placed  on  the  market.  In  cases  of  early  termination  or  temporary  halt,  the summary and the report shall become publicly accessible immediately after submission.
If  the  device  is  not  registered  in  accordance  with  Article  29  within  one year  of  the  summary and the report having been entered  into  the  electronic  system  pursuant  to  paragraph  5  of  this  Article,  they  shall  become  publicly  accessible  at  that point in time. ## Article 78
## Coordinated assessment procedure for clinical investigations
- 1. By means of the electronic system referred to in Article 73, the sponsor of a clinical investigation to be conducted in  more  than  one  Member  State  may  submit,  for  the  purpose  of  Article  70,  a  single  application  that,  upon  receipt,  is transmitted electronically to all Member States in which the clinical investigation is to be conducted.
- 2. The  sponsor  shall  propose  in  the  single  application  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  that  one  of  the  Member  States  in which  the  clinical  investigation  is  to  be  conducted  acts  as  coordinating  Member  State.  The  Member  States  in  which  the clinical  investigation  is  to  be  conducted  shall,  within  six  days  of  submission  of  the  application,  agree  on  one  of  them taking the role of the coordinating Member State. If they do not agree on a coordinating Member State, the coordinating Member State proposed by the sponsor shall assume that role.
- 3. Under  the  direction  of  the  coordinating  Member  State  referred  to  in  paragraph  2,  the  Member  States  concerned shall  coordinate  their  assessment  of  the  application,  in  particular  of  the  documentation  referred  to  in  Chapter  II  of Annex XV.
However,  the  completeness  of  the  documentation  referred  to  in  Sections  ,  ,  ,    and    of  Chapter  II  of Annex XV shall be assessed separately by each Member State concerned in accordance with Article 70(1) to (5).
- 4. With  regard  to  documentation  other  than  that  referred  to  in  the  second  subparagraph  of  paragraph  3,  the coordinating Member State shall:
- (a)   within  six  days  of  receipt  of  the  single  application,  notify  the  sponsor  that  it  is  the  coordinating  Member  State ('notification date');
- (b)   for  the  purpose  of  the  validation  of  the  application,  take  into  account  any  considerations  submitted  within  seven days of the notification date by any Member State concerned;
- (c)   within  10  days  of  the  notification  date,  assess  whether  the  clinical  investigation  falls  within  the  scope  of  this Regulation  and  whether  the  application  is  complete,  and  shall  notify  the  sponsor  accordingly.  Article  70(1)  and  (3) to (5) shall apply to the coordinating Member State in relation to that assessment;
- (d)   establish  the  results  of  its  assessment  in  a  draft  assessment  report  to  be  transmitted  within  26  days  of  the  validation date  to  the  Member  States  concerned.  By  day  38  after  the  validation  date,  the  other  Member  States  concerned  shall transmit  their  comments  and  proposals  on  the  draft  assessment  report  and  the  underlying  application  to  the coordinating  Member  State  which  shall  take  due  account  of  those  comments  and  proposals  in  its  finalisation  of  the final  assessment  report,  to  be  transmitted  within  45  days  of  the  validation  date  to  the  sponsor  and  the  other Member States concerned.
The final assessment report shall be taken into account by all Member States concerned when deciding on the sponsor's application in accordance with Article 70(7).
- 5. As  regards  the  assessment  of  the  documentation  referred  to  in  the  second  subparagraph  of  paragraph  3,  each Member State concerned may request, on a single occasion, additional information from the sponsor. 