- 2. The  Sponsor  shall  have  an  agreement  in  place  to  ensure  that  any  serious  adverse  events  or  any  other  event  as referred to in Article 80(2) are reported by the investigator or investigators to the sponsor  in a timely manner.
- 3. The  documentation  mentioned  in  this  Annex  shall  be  kept  for  a  period  of  at  least  10  years  after  the  clinical investigation  with  the  device  in  question  has  ended,  or,  in  the  event  that  the  device  is  subsequently  placed  on the  market,  at  least  10  years  after  the  last  device  has  been  placed  on  the  market.  In  the  case  of  implantable devices, the period shall be at least 15 years.
- Each Member State shall require that this documentation is kept at the disposal of  the competent authorities for the  period  referred  to  in  the  first  subparagraph  in  case  the  sponsor,  or  its  contact  person  or  legal  representative as  referred  to  in  Article  62(2)  established  within  its  territory,  goes  bankrupt  or  ceases  its  activity  prior  to  the end of this period.
- 4. The Sponsor shall appoint a monitor  that is independent from the investigational site to ensure that the investi­ gation is conducted in accordance with the CIP, the principles of good clinical practice and this Regulation.
- 5. The Sponsor shall complete the follow-up of investigation subjects.
- 6. The Sponsor shall provide  evidence  that  the  investigation  is  being  conducted  in  line  with  good  clinical  practice, for  instance through internal or external inspection.
- 7. The Sponsor shall prepare a clinical investigation report which includes at least the following:
- -  Cover/introductory  page  or  pages  indicating  the  title  of  the  investigation,  the  investigational  device,  the single identification number, the CIP number and the details with signatures of the coordinating investigators and the principal investigators from each investigational site.
- -  Details of the author and date of the report.
- - A summary of  the  investigation  covering  the  title,  purpose  of  the  investigation,  description  of  the  investi­ gation,  investigational  design  and  methods  used,  the  results  of  the  investigation  and  conclusion  of  the investigation.  The  completion  date  of  the  investigation,  and  in  particular  details  of  early  termination, temporary halts or suspensions of investigations.
- -  Investigational device description, in particular clearly defined intended purpose.
- -  A  summary  of  the  clinical  investigation  plan  covering  objectives,  design,  ethical  aspects,  monitoring  and quality  measures,  selection  criteria,  target  patient  populations,  sample  size,  treatment  schedules,  follow-up duration,  concomitant  treatments,  statistical  plan,  including  hypothesis,  sample  size  calculation  and  analysis methods, as well as a justification.
- -  Results  of  the  clinical  investigation  covering,  with  rationale  and  justification,  subject  demographics,  analysis of  results  related  to  chosen  endpoints,  details  of  subgroup  analysis,  as  well  as  compliance  with  the  CIP,  and covering  follow-up  of  missing  data  and  of  patients  withdrawing  from  the  clinical  investigation,  or  lost  to follow-up.
- -  Summary  of  serious  adverse  events,  adverse  device  effects,  device  deficiencies  and  any  relevant  corrective actions.
- -  Discussion  and  overall  conclusions  covering  safety  and  performance  results,  assessment  of  risks  and  clinical benefits,  discussion  of  clinical  relevance  in  accordance  with  clinical  state  of  the  art,  any  specific  precautions for specific patient populations, implications for  the investigational device, limitations of  the investigation.
## ANNEX XVI
## LIST  OF  GROUPS  OF  PRODUCTS  WITHOUT  AN  INTENDED  MEDICAL  PURPOSE  REFERRED  TO  IN ARTICLE 1(2)
- 1.   Contact lenses or other items intended to be introduced into or onto the eye.
- 2.   Products  intended  to  be  totally  or  partially  introduced  into  the  human  body  through  surgically  invasive  means  for the  purpose  of  modifying  the  anatomy  or  fixation  of  body  parts  with  the  exception  of  tattooing  products  and piercings.
- 3.   Substances,  combinations  of  substances,  or  items  intended  to  be  used  for  facial  or  other  dermal  or  mucous membrane  filling  by  subcutaneous,  submucous  or  intradermal  injection  or  other  introduction,  excluding  those  for tattooing.
