If  the  intended  use  of  such  devices includes  treatment  of  children  or  treatment  of  pregnant  or  breastfeeding  women  or  treatment  of  other  patient groups considered particularly vulnerable to such substances and/or  materials, information on residual risks for those patient groups and, if applicable, on appropriate precautionary measures shall be given in the instructions for use.
- . Devices shall be designed and manufactured in such a way as to reduce as far as possible the risks posed by the unintentional  ingress  of  substances  into  the  device  taking  into  account  the  device  and  the  nature  of  the environment in which it is intended to be used.
- . Devices shall be designed and manufactured in such a way as to reduce as far as possible the risks linked to the size  and  the  properties  of  particles  which  are  or  can  be  released  into  the  patient's  or  user's  body,  unless  they come into contact with intact skin only. Special attention shall be given to nanomaterials.
- 11. Infection and microbial contamination
- . Devices and their manufacturing processes shall be designed in such a way as to eliminate or  to reduce as far as possible the risk of infection to patients, users and, where applicable, other persons. The design shall:
- (a)   reduce  as  far  as  possible  and  appropriate  the  risks  from  unintended  cuts  and  pricks,  such  as  needle  stick injuries,
- (b)   allow easy and safe handling,
- (c)   reduce as far as possible any microbial leakage from the device and/or microbial exposure during use, and
- (d)   prevent microbial contamination of the device or its content such as specimens or fluids.
- . Where necessary devices shall be designed to facilitate their safe cleaning, disinfection, and/or re-sterilisation.
- . Devices  labelled  as  having  a  specific  microbial  state  shall  be  designed,  manufactured  and  packaged  to  ensure that  they  remain  in  that  state  when  placed  on  the  market  and  remain  so  under  the  transport  and  storage conditions specified by the manufacturer.
- . Devices delivered in a sterile state shall be designed, manufactured and packaged in accordance with appropriate  procedures,  to  ensure  that  they  are  sterile  when  placed  on  the  market  and  that,  unless  the packaging  which  is  intended  to  maintain  their  sterile  condition  is  damaged,  they  remain  sterile,  under  the transport  and  storage  conditions  specified  by  the  manufacturer,  until  that  packaging  is  opened  at  the  point  of use. It shall be ensured that the integrity of that packaging is clearly evident to the final user.
- . Devices  labelled  as  sterile  shall  be  processed,  manufactured,  packaged  and,  sterilised  by  means  of  appropriate, validated methods.
- . Devices  intended  to  be  sterilised  shall  be  manufactured  and  packaged  in  appropriate  and  controlled  conditions and facilities.
- . Packaging systems for  non-sterile  devices shall maintain the integrity and cleanliness of  the product and, where the devices are to be sterilised prior  to use, minimise the risk of microbial contamination; the packaging system shall be suitable taking account of the method of sterilisation indicated by the manufacturer. - . The  labelling  of  the  device  shall  distinguish  between  identical  or  similar  devices  placed  on  the  market  in  both a sterile  and a non-sterile condition additional to the symbol used to indicate that devices are sterile.
- 12. Devices  incorporating  a  substance  considered  to  be  a  medicinal  product  and  devices  that  are  composed  of substances or of combinations of substances that are absorbed by or locally dispersed in the human body.
- . In  the  case  of  devices  referred  to  in  the  first  subparagraph  of  Article  1(8),  the  quality,  safety  and  usefulness  of the  substance  which,  if  used  separately,  would  be  considered  to  be  a  medicinal  product  within  the  meaning  of point  (2)  of  Article  1  of  Directive  2001/83/EC,  shall  be  verified  by  analogy  with  the  methods  specified  in Annex  I  to  Directive  2001/83/EC,  as  required  by  the  applicable  conformity  assessment  procedure  under  this Regulation.
- . Devices  that  are  composed  of  substances  or  of  combinations  of  substances  that  are  intended  to  be  introduced into  the  human  body,  and  that  are  absorbed  by  or  locally  dispersed  in  the  human  body  shall  comply,  where applicable and in a manner  limited to the aspects not covered by this Regulation, with the relevant requirements  laid  down  in  Annex  I  to  Directive  2001/83/EC  for  the  evaluation  of  absorption,  distribution, metabolism,  excretion,  local  tolerance,  toxicity,  interaction  with  other  devices,  medicinal  products  or  other substances  and  potential  for  adverse  reactions,  as  required  by  the  applicable  conformity  assessment  procedure under this Regulation.
- 13. Devices incorporating materials of biological origin
- . For  devices  manufactured  utilising  derivatives  of  tissues  or  cells  of  human  origin  which  are  non-viable  or  are rendered non-viable  covered  by this  Regulation  in  accordance  with  point  (g)  of  Article  1(6),  the  following  shall apply:
- (a)   donation, procurement and testing of the tissues and cells shall be done in accordance with Directive 2004/23/EC;
- (b)   processing,  preservation  and  any  other  handling  of  those  tissues  and  cells  or  their  derivatives  shall  be carried  out  so  as  to  provide  safety  for  patients,  users  and,  where  applicable,  other  persons.  In  particular, safety  with  regard  to  viruses  and  other  transmissible  agents  shall  be  addressed  by  appropriate  methods  of sourcing  and  by  implementation  of  validated  methods  of  elimination  or  inactivation  in  the  course  of  the manufacturing process;
- (c)   the  traceability  system  for  those  devices  shall  be  complementary  and  compatible  with  the  traceability  and data protection requirements laid down in Directive 2004/23/EC and in Directive 2002/98/EC.
- . For devices manufactured utilising tissues or cells of animal origin, or  their derivatives, which are non-viable or rendered non-viable the following shall apply:
- (a)   where  feasible  taking  into account the animal species, tissues and cells of animal origin, or  their derivatives, shall  originate  from  animals  that  have  been  subjected  to  veterinary  controls  that  are  adapted  to  the intended  use  of  the  tissues.  Information  on  the  geographical  origin  of  the  animals  shall  be  retained  by manufacturers;
- (b)   sourcing,  processing,  preservation,  testing  and  handling  of  tissues,  cells  and  substances  of  animal  origin,  or their  derivatives,  shall  be  carried  out  so  as  to  provide  safety  for  patients,  users  and,  where  applicable,  other persons.  In  particular  safety  with  regard  to  viruses  and  other  transmissible  agents  shall  be  addressed  by implementation of validated methods of elimination or viral inactivation in the course of the manufacturing process,  except  when  the  use  of  such  methods  would  lead  to  unacceptable  degradation  compromising  the clinical benefit of  the device;
- (c)   in  the  case  of  devices  manufactured utilising tissues or cells of animal origin, or  their derivatives, as referred to in Regulation (EU) No 722/2012 the particular requirements laid down in that Regulation shall apply.
- . For devices manufactured utilising non-viable biological substances other than those referred to in Sections    and  ,  the  processing,  preservation,  testing  and  handling  of  those  substances  shall  be  carried out  so  as  to  provide  safety  for  patients,  users  and,  where  applicable,  other  persons,  including  in  the  waste disposal  chain.  In  particular,  safety  with  regard  to  viruses  and  other  transmissible  agents  shall  be  addressed  by appropriate methods of sourcing and by implementation of validated methods of elimination or  inactivation in the course of the manufacturing process. - 14. Construction of devices and interaction with their environment
- . If  the  device  is  intended  for  use  in  combination  with  other  devices  or  equipment  the  whole  combination, including  the  connection  system  shall  be  safe  and  shall  not  impair  the  specified  performance  of  the  devices. Any restrictions on use applying to such combinations shall be indicated on the label and/or in the instructions for  use.  Connections which the user has to handle, such as fluid, gas transfer, electrical or  mechanical coupling, shall be designed and constructed in such a way as to minimise all possible risks, such as misconnection.
- . Devices shall be designed and manufactured in such a way as to remove or reduce as far as possible:
- (a)   the risk of injury, in connection with their physical features, including the volume/pressure ratio, dimensional and where appropriate ergonomic features;
- (b)   risks  connected  with  reasonably  foreseeable  external  influences  or  environmental  conditions,  such  as magnetic  fields,  external  electrical  and  electromagnetic  effects,  electrostatic  discharge,  radiation  associated with  diagnostic  or  therapeutic  procedures,  pressure,  humidity,  temperature,  variations  in  pressure  and acceleration or radio signal interferences;
- (c)   the  risks  associated  with  the  use  of  the  device  when  it  comes  into  contact  with  materials,  liquids,  and substances, including gases, to which it is exposed during normal conditions of use;
- (d)   the  risks  associated  with  the  possible  negative  interaction  between  software  and  the  IT environment  within which it operates and interacts;
- (e)   the  risks  of accidental ingress of substances into the device;
- (f)   the  risks  of  reciprocal  interference  with  other  devices  normally  used  in  the  investigations  or  for  the treatment given; and
- (g)   risks  arising  where  maintenance or  calibration  are  not  possible  (as  with  implants),  from  ageing  of  materials used or loss of accuracy of any measuring or control mechanism.
- . Devices  shall  be  designed  and  manufactured  in  such  a  way  as  to  minimise  the  risks  of  fire  or  explosion  during normal use and in single fault condition. Particular attention shall be paid to devices the intended use of which includes  exposure  to  or  use  in  association  with  flammable  or  explosive  substances  or  substances  which  could cause combustion.
- . Devices  shall  be  designed  and  manufactured  in  such  a  way  that  adjustment,  calibration,  and  maintenance  can be done safely and effectively.
- . Devices  that  are  intended  to  be  operated  together  with  other  devices  or  products  shall  be  designed  and manufactured in such a way that the interoperability and compatibility are reliable and safe.
-  Any  measurement,  monitoring  or  display  scale  shall  be  designed  and  manufactured  in  line  with  ergonomic principles,  taking  account  of  the  intended  purpose,  users  and  the  environmental  conditions  in  which  the devices are intended to be used.
- . Devices  shall  be  designed  and  manufactured  in  such  a  way  as  to  facilitate  their  safe  disposal  and  the  safe disposal  of  related  waste  substances  by  the  user,  patient  or  other  person.  To  that  end,  manufacturers  shall identify  and  test  procedures  and  measures  as  a  result  of  which  their  devices  can  be  safely  disposed  after  use. Such procedures shall be described in the instructions for use.
- 15. Devices with a diagnostic or measuring function
- . Diagnostic devices and devices with a measuring function, shall be designed and manufactured in such a way as to provide sufficient accuracy, precision and stability for  their  intended purpose, based on appropriate scientific and technical methods. The limits of accuracy shall be indicated by the manufacturer.
- . The  measurements  made  by devices  with  a  measuring  function  shall  be  expressed  in  legal  units  conforming  to the provisions of Council Directive 80/181/EEC ( 1 ).
- ( 1 ) Council  Directive  80/181/EEC  of  20  December  1979  on  the  approximation  of  the  laws  of  the  Member  States  relating  to  units  of measurement and on the repeal of Directive 71/354/EEC (OJ L 39, , p. 40).
## 16. Protection against radiation
## . General
- (a)   Devices  shall  be  designed,  manufactured  and  packaged  in  such  a  way  that  exposure  of  patients,  users  and other  persons  to  radiation  is  reduced  as  far  as  possible,  and  in  a  manner  that  is  compatible  with  the intended  purpose,  whilst  not  restricting  the  application  of  appropriate  specified  levels  for  therapeutic  and diagnostic purposes.
- (b)   The  operating  instructions  for  devices  emitting  hazardous  or  potentially  hazardous  radiation  shall  contain detailed  information  as  to  the  nature  of  the  emitted  radiation,  the  means  of  protecting  the  patient  and  the user,  and  on  ways  of  avoiding  misuse  and  of  reducing  the  risks  inherent  to  installation  as  far  as  possible and appropriate. 