Without prejudice to the powers of  the competent authorities pursuant to Articles 32 and 33, each Member State may  lay  down  the  rules  on  whether  and  to  what  extent  administrative  fines  may  be  imposed  on  public  administration entities.
- 8. Where the legal system of a Member State does not provide for administrative fines, that Member State shall ensure that  this  Article  is  applied  in  such  a  manner  that  the  fine  is  initiated  by  the  competent  authority  and  imposed  by competent national courts or tribunals, while ensuring that those legal remedies are effective and have an equivalent effect to  the  administrative  fines  imposed  by  the  competent  authorities.  In  any  event,  the  fines  imposed  shall  be  effective, proportionate and dissuasive. The Member State shall notify to the Commission the provisions of the laws which it adopts pursuant  to  this  paragraph  by  17  October  2024 and,  without  delay,  any  subsequent  amendment  law  or  amendment affecting them.
## Article 35
## Infringements entailing a personal data breach
- 1. Where the competent authorities become aware in the course of supervision or enforcement that the infringement by an essential or important entity of the obligations laid down in Articles 21 and 23 of this Directive can entail a personal data breach, as defined in Article 4, point (12), of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 which is to be notified pursuant to Article 33 of that Regulation, they shall, without undue delay, inform the supervisory authorities as referred to in Article 55 or 56 of that Regulation. - 2. Where  the  supervisory  authorities  as  referred  to  in  Article  55  or  56  of  Regulation  (EU)  2016/679  impose  an administrative fine pursuant to Article 58(2), point (i), of  that Regulation, the competent authorities shall not impose an administrative fine pursuant to Article 34 of  this Directive for an infringement referred to in paragraph 1 of  this Article arising  from  the  same  conduct  as  that  which  was  the  subject  of  the  administrative  fine  under  Article  58(2),  point  (i),  of Regulation (EU)  2016/679. The competent authorities may, however, impose the enforcement measures provided for  in Article 32(4), points (a) to (h), Article 32(5) and Article 33(4), points (a) to (g), of this Directive.
- 3. Where the supervisory authority competent pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2016/679 is established in another Member State than the competent authority, the competent authority shall inform the supervisory authority established in its own Member State of the potential data breach referred to in paragraph 1.
Article 36
## Penalties
Member States shall lay down rules on penalties applicable to infringements of national measures adopted pursuant to this Directive  and  shall  take  all  measures  necessary  to  ensure  that  they  are  implemented.  The  penalties  provided  for  shall  be effective,  proportionate  and  dissuasive.  Member  States  shall,  by  17  January  2025,  notify  the  Commission  of  those  rules and of those measures and shall notify it, without delay of any subsequent amendment affecting them.
## Article 37
## Mutual assistance
- 1. Where an entity provides services in more than one Member State, or provides services in one or more Member States and its network and information systems are located in one or more other Member States, the competent authorities of the Member States concerned shall cooperate with and assist each other as necessary. That cooperation  shall entail,  at least, that:
- (a) the competent authorities applying supervisory or enforcement measures in a Member State shall, via the single point of  contact,  inform  and  consult  the  competent  authorities  in  the  other  Member  States  concerned  on  the  supervisory and enforcement measures taken;
- (b) a competent authority may request another competent authority to take supervisory or enforcement measures;
- (c) a  competent  authority  shall,  upon  receipt of  a  substantiated  request  from  another  competent  authority,  provide  the other  competent  authority  with  mutual  assistance  proportionate  to  its  own  resources  so  that  the  supervisory  or enforcement measures can be implemented in an effective, efficient and consistent manner.
The  mutual  assistance  referred  to  in  the  first  subparagraph,  point  (c),  may  cover  information  requests  and  supervisory measures,  including  requests  to  carry  out  on-site  inspections  or  off-site  supervision  or  targeted  security  audits.  A competent authority to which a request for assistance is addressed shall not refuse that request unless it is established that it  does  not  have  the  competence to provide the requested assistance, the requested assistance is not proportionate to the supervisory tasks of the competent authority, or  the request concerns information or entails activities which, if disclosed or  carried  out,  would  be  contrary  to  the  essential  interests  of  the  Member  State's  national  security,  public  security  or defence. Before refusing such a request, the competent authority shall consult the other competent authorities concerned as well as, upon the request of one of the Member States concerned, the Commission and ENISA.
- 2. Where appropriate and with common agreement, the competent authorities of various Member States may carry out joint supervisory actions. 
## CHAPTER VIII
## DELEGATED AND IMPLEMENTING ACTS
## Article 38
## Exercise of the delegation
- 1. The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission subject to the conditions laid down in this Article.
- 2. The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Article 24(2) shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of five years from 16 January 2023.
- 3. The delegation of power referred to in Article 24(2) may be revoked at any time by the European Parliament or by the Council. A decision to revoke shall put an end to the delegation of the power specified in that decision. It shall take effect the  day  following  the  publication  of  the  decision  in  the Official  Journal  of  the  European  Union or  at  a  later  date  specified therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegated acts already in force.
- 4. Before adopting a delegated act, the Commission shall consult experts designated by each Member State in accordance with the principles laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 April 2016 on Better Law-Making.
- 5. As soon as it adopts a delegated act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the Council.
- 6. A delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 24(2) shall enter into force only if no objection has been expressed either by the European Parliament or by the Council within a period of two months of notification of that act to the European Parliament and to the Council or if, before the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council have both informed the Commission that they will not object. That period shall be extended by two months at the initiative of the European Parliament or of the Council.
## Article 39
## Committee procedure
- 1. The  Commission  shall  be  assisted  by  a  committee.  That  committee  shall  be  a  committee  within  the  meaning  of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011.
- 2. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply.
- 3. Where  the  opinion  of  the  committee  is  to  be  obtained  by  written  procedure,  that  procedure  shall  be  terminated without  result  when,  within  the  time-limit  for  delivery  of  the  opinion,  the  chair  of  the  committee  so  decides  or  a committee member so requests.
## CHAPTER IX
## FINAL PROVISIONS
## Article 40
## Review
By 17 October 2027 and every 36 months thereafter, the Commission shall review the functioning of this Directive, and report to the European Parliament and to the Council. The report shall in particular assess the relevance of the size of the entities concerned, and the sectors, subsectors and types of entity referred to in Annexes I and II for the functioning of the economy  and  society  in  relation  to  cybersecurity.  To  that  end  and  with  a  view  to  further  advancing  the  strategic  and operational  cooperation,  the  Commission  shall  take  into account  the  reports  of  the  Cooperation  Group  and  the  CSIRTs network on the experience gained at a strategic and operational level. The report shall be accompanied, where necessary, by a legislative proposal. ## Article 41
## Transposition
- 1. By 17 October 2024, Member States shall adopt and publish the measures necessary to comply with this Directive. They shall immediately inform the Commission thereof.
