- (15) Entities falling within the scope of this Directive for the purpose of compliance with cybersecurity risk-management measures and reporting obligations should be classified into two categories, essential entities and important entities, reflecting the extent to which they are critical as regards their sector or  the type of service they provide, as well as their size. In that regard, due account should be taken of any relevant sectoral risk assessments or guidance by the competent  authorities,  where  applicable.  The  supervisory  and  enforcement  regimes  for  those  two  categories  of entities should be differentiated to ensure a fair balance between risk-based requirements and obligations on the one hand, and the administrative burden stemming from the supervision of compliance on the other.
- (16) In order to avoid entities that have partner enterprises or that are linked enterprises being considered to be essential or important entities where this would be disproportionate, Member States are able to take into account the degree of  independence an entity enjoys in relation to its partner or linked enterprises when applying Article 6(2) of  the Annex to Recommendation 2003/361/EC. In particular, Member States are able to take into account the fact that an entity  is  independent from its partner or linked enterprises in terms of  the network and information systems that that entity uses in the provision of its services and in terms of  the services that the entity provides. On that basis, where  appropriate,  Member  States  are  able  to  consider  that  such  an  entity  does  not  qualify  as  a  medium-sized enterprise  under  Article  2  of  the  Annex  to  Recommendation  2003/361/EC,  or  does  not  exceed  the  ceilings  for  a medium-sized  enterprise  provided  for  in  paragraph  1  of  that  Article,  if,  after  taking  into  account  the  degree  of independence of that entity, that entity would not have been considered to qualify as a medium-sized enterprise or to exceed those ceilings in the event that only its own data had been taken into account. This leaves unaffected the obligations laid down in this Directive of partner and linked enterprises which fall within the scope of this Directive.
- (17) Member  States  should  be  able  to  decide  that  entities  identified  before  the  entry  into  force  of  this  Directive  as operators  of  essential  services  in  accordance  with  Directive  (EU)  2016/1148  are  to  be  considered  to  be  essential entities.
- ( 7 ) Directive 97/67/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 December 1997 on common rules for the development of the internal market of Community postal services and the improvement of quality of service (OJ L 15, , p. 14).
- ( 8 ) Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard  to  the  processing  of  personal  data  and  on  the  free  movement  of  such  data,  and  repealing  Directive  95/46/EC  (General  Data Protection Regulation) (OJ L 119, , p. 1).
- ( 9 ) Directive 2002/58/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 July 2002 concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications  sector (Directive on privacy and electronic  communications) (OJ L 201, , p. 37). - (18) In order  to ensure a clear overview of  the entities falling within the scope of  this Directive, Member States should establish a list of essential and important entities as well as entities providing domain name registration services. For that purpose, Member States should require entities to submit at least the following information to the competent authorities, namely, the name, address and up-to-date contact details, including the email addresses, IP ranges and telephone numbers of the entity, and, where applicable, the relevant sector and subsector referred to in the annexes, as well as, where applicable, a list of the Member States where they provide services falling within the scope of this Directive.  To  that  end,  the  Commission,  with  the  assistance  of  the  European  Union  Agency  for  Cybersecurity (ENISA),  should,  without  undue  delay,  provide  guidelines  and  templates  regarding  the  obligation  to  submit information.  To  facilitate  the  establishing  and  updating  of  the  list  of  essential  and  important  entities  as  well  as entities providing domain  name  registration  services, Member  States  should  be  able  to  establish national mechanisms for entities to register themselves. Where registers exist at national level, Member States can decide on the appropriate mechanisms that allow for the identification of entities falling within the scope of this Directive.
- (19) Member  States  should  be  responsible  for  submitting  to  the  Commission  at  least  the  number  of  essential  and important entities for each sector and subsector referred to in the annexes, as well as relevant information about the number of identified entities and the provision, from among those laid down in this Directive, on the basis of which they were identified, and the type of service that they provide. Member States are encouraged to exchange with the Commission  information  about  essential  and  important  entities  and,  in  the  case  of  a  large-scale  cybersecurity incident, relevant information such as the name of the entity concerned.
- (20) The Commission should, in cooperation with the Cooperation Group and after consulting the relevant stakeholders, provide guidelines on the implementation of the criteria applicable to microenterprises and small enterprises for the assessment  of  whether  they  fall  within  the  scope  of  this  Directive.  The  Commission  should  also  ensure  that appropriate  guidance  is  given  to  microenterprises  and  small  enterprises  falling  within  the  scope  of  this  Directive. The Commission should, with the assistance of the Member States, make information available to microenterprises and small enterprises in that regard.
- (21) The Commission could provide guidance to assist Member States in implementing the provisions of this Directive on scope  and  evaluating  the  proportionality  of  the  measures  to  be  taken  pursuant  to  this  Directive,  in  particular  as regards entities  with  complex business models or operating environments, whereby an entity may simultaneously fulfil  the criteria assigned to both essential and important entities or may simultaneously carry out activities, some of which fall within and some of which are excluded from the scope of this Directive.
- (22) This Directive sets out the baseline for cybersecurity risk-management measures and reporting obligations across the sectors that fall within its scope. In order to avoid the fragmentation of cybersecurity provisions of Union legal acts, where further sector-specific Union legal acts pertaining to cybersecurity risk-management measures and reporting obligations are considered to be necessary to ensure a high level of cybersecurity across the Union, the Commission should  assess  whether  such  further  provisions  could  be  stipulated  in  an  implementing  act  under  this  Directive. Should such an implementing act not be suitable for that purpose, sector-specific Union legal acts could contribute to  ensuring  a  high  level  of  cybersecurity  across  the  Union,  while  taking  full  account  of  the  specificities  and complexities of the sectors concerned. To that end, this Directive does not preclude the adoption of further sectorspecific  Union  legal  acts  addressing  cybersecurity  risk-management  measures  and  reporting  obligations  that  take due  account  of  the  need  for  a  comprehensive  and  consistent  cybersecurity  framework.  This  Directive  is  without prejudice to the existing implementing powers that have been conferred on the Commission in a number of sectors, including transport and energy.
- (23) Where  a  sector-specific  Union  legal  act  contains  provisions  requiring  essential  or  important  entities  to  adopt cybersecurity  risk-management  measures  or  to  notify  significant  incidents,  and  where  those  requirements  are  at least  equivalent  in  effect  to  the  obligations  laid  down  in  this  Directive,  those  provisions,  including  on  supervision 
and enforcement, should apply to such entities.  If a  sector-specific  Union  legal  act  does  not  cover  all  entities  in  a specific sector falling within the scope of this Directive, the relevant provisions of this Directive should continue to apply to the entities not covered by that act.
- (24) Where provisions of a sector-specific Union legal act require essential or important entities to comply with reporting obligations  that  are  at  least  equivalent  in  effect  to  the  reporting  obligations  laid  down  in  this  Directive,  the consistency  and  effectiveness  of  the  handling  of  incident  notifications  should  be  ensured.  To  that  end,  the provisions  relating  to  incident  notifications  of  the  sector-specific  Union  legal  act  should  provide  the  CSIRTs,  the competent authorities or the single points of contact on cybersecurity (single points of contact) under this Directive with an immediate access to the incident notifications submitted in accordance with the sector-specific Union legal act. In particular, such immediate access can be ensured if incident notifications are being forwarded without undue delay to the CSIRT, the competent authority or the single point of contact under this Directive. Where appropriate, Member  States  should  put  in  place  an  automatic  and  direct  reporting  mechanism  that  ensures  systematic  and immediate  sharing  of  information  with  the  CSIRTs,  the  competent  authorities  or  the  single  points  of  contact concerning  the  handling of such  incident notifications. For the purpose  of simplifying reporting and  of implementing the automatic and direct reporting mechanism, Member States could, in accordance with the sectorspecific Union legal act, use a single entry point.
- (25) Sector-specific Union legal acts which provide for cybersecurity risk-management measures or reporting obligations that are at least equivalent in effect to those laid down in this Directive could provide that the competent authorities under such acts exercise their supervisory and enforcement powers in relation to such measures or obligations with the  assistance  of  the  competent  authorities  under  this  Directive.  The  competent  authorities  concerned  could establish  cooperation arrangements for  that purpose. Such cooperation arrangements could specify, inter alia, the procedures  concerning  the  coordination  of  supervisory  activities,  including  the  procedures  of  investigations  and on-site inspections in accordance with national law, and a mechanism for the exchange of relevant information on supervision  and  enforcement  between  the  competent  authorities,  including  access  to  cyber-related  information requested by the competent authorities under this Directive.
- (26) Where sector-specific  Union  legal  acts  require  or  provide  incentives  to  entities  to  notify  significant  cyber  threats, Member  States  should  also  encourage  the  sharing  of  significant  cyber  threats  with  the  CSIRTs,  the  competent authorities or the single points of contact under this Directive, in order to ensure an enhanced level of those bodies' awareness of the cyber threat landscape and to enable them to respond effectively and in a timely manner should the significant cyber threats materialise.
- (27) Future  sector-specific  Union  legal  acts  should  take  due  account  of  the  definitions  and  the  supervisory  and enforcement framework laid down in this Directive.
- (28) Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 10 ) should be considered to be a sectorspecific  Union  legal  act  in  relation  to  this  Directive  with  regard  to  financial  entities.  The  provisions  of  Regulation (EU)  2022/2554 relating  to information  and  communication  technology  (ICT)  risk  management,  management of ICT-related  incidents  and,  in  particular,  major  ICT-related  incident  reporting,  as  well  as  on  digital  operational resilience  testing,  information-sharing  arrangements  and  ICT  third-party  risk  should  apply  instead  of  those provided  for  in  this  Directive.  Member  States  should  therefore  not  apply  the  provisions  of  this  Directive  on cybersecurity  risk-management  and  reporting  obligations,  and  supervision  and  enforcement,  to  financial  entities covered by Regulation (EU) 2022/2554. At the same time, it is important to maintain a strong relationship and the exchange  of  information  with  the  financial  sector  under  this  Directive.  To  that  end,  Regulation  (EU)  2022/2554 allows  the  European  Supervisory  Authorities  (ESAs)  and  the  competent  authorities  under  that  Regulation  to participate in  the  activities  of  the  Cooperation  Group  and  to exchange information  and cooperate with the  single points  of  contact,  as  well  as  with  the  CSIRTs  and  the  competent  authorities  under  this  Directive.  The  competent authorities under Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 should also transmit details of major ICT-related incidents and, where relevant, significant cyber threats to the CSIRTs, the competent authorities or the single points of contact under this Directive.  This  is  achievable  by  providing  immediate  access  to  incident  notifications  and  forwarding  them  either
( 10 ) Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 December 2022 on digital operational resilience for the financial sector and amending Regulations (EC) No 1060/2009, (EU) No 648/2012, (EU) No 600/2014, (EU) No 909/2014 and (EU) 2016/1011 (see page 1 of this Official Journal). directly or through a single entry point. Moreover, Member States should continue to include the financial sector in their cybersecurity strategies and CSIRTs can cover the financial sector in their activities.
- (29) In  order  to  avoid  gaps  between  or  duplications  of  cybersecurity  obligations  imposed  on  entities  in  the  aviation sector,  national  authorities  under  Regulations  (EC)  No  300/2008 ( 11 ) and  (EU)  2018/1139 ( 12 ) of  the  European Parliament  and of  the  Council  and  the  competent  authorities  under  this  Directive  should  cooperate  in  relation  to the  implementation  of  cybersecurity  risk-management  measures  and  the  supervision  of  compliance  with  those measures at national level. The compliance of an entity with the security requirements laid down in Regulations (EC) No 300/2008 and (EU) 2018/1139 and in the relevant delegated and implementing acts adopted pursuant to those Regulations  could  be  considered  by  the  competent  authorities  under  this  Directive  to  constitute  compliance  with the corresponding requirements laid down in this Directive.
- (30) In view of the interlinkages between cybersecurity and the physical security of entities, a coherent approach should be ensured between Directive (EU) 2022/2557 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 13 ) and this Directive. To  achieve  this,  entities  identified  as  critical  entities  under  Directive  (EU)  2022/2557  should  be  considered  to  be essential  entities  under  this  Directive.  Moreover,  each  Member  State  should  ensure  that  its  national  cybersecurity strategy  provides  for  a  policy  framework  for  enhanced  coordination  within  that  Member  State  between  its competent authorities under this Directive and those under Directive (EU) 2022/2557 in the context of information sharing about risks, cyber threats, and incidents as well as on non-cyber risks, threats and incidents, and the exercise of  supervisory  tasks.  The  competent  authorities  under  this  Directive  and  those  under  Directive  (EU)  2022/2557 should  cooperate  and  exchange information without undue delay,  in particular  in  relation  to the  identification  of critical  entities,  risks,  cyber  threats,  and  incidents  as  well  as  in  relation  to  non-cyber  risks,  threats  and  incidents affecting  critical  entities,  including  the  cybersecurity  and  physical measures  taken  by critical  entities  as  well  as  the results of supervisory activities carried out with regard to such entities.
Furthermore, in order  to streamline  supervisory  activities  between  the  competent  authorities  under  this  Directive and  those  under  Directive  (EU)  2022/2557  and  in  order  to  minimise  the  administrative  burden  for  the  entities concerned,  those  competent  authorities  should  endeavour  to  harmonise  incident  notification  templates  and supervisory  processes.  Where  appropriate,  the  competent  authorities  under  Directive  (EU)  2022/2557,  should  be able to request the competent authorities under this Directive to exercise their supervisory and enforcement powers in  relation  to  an  entity  that  is  identified  as  a  critical  entity  under  Directive  (EU)  2022/2557.  The  competent authorities  under  this  Directive  and  those  under  Directive  (EU)  2022/2557  should,  where  possible  in  real  time, cooperate and exchange information for that purpose.
- (31) Entities belonging to the digital infrastructure sector are in essence based on network and information systems and therefore  the  obligations  imposed  on  those  entities  pursuant  to  this  Directive  should  address  in  a  comprehensive manner  the  physical  security  of  such  systems  as  part  of  their  cybersecurity  risk-management  measures  and reporting obligations. Since those matters are covered by this Directive, the obligations laid down in Chapters III, IV and VI of Directive (EU) 2022/2557 do not apply to such entities.
( 11 ) Regulation (EC) No 300/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 2008 on common rules in the field of civil aviation security and repealing Regulation (EC) No 2320/2002 (OJ L 97, , p. 72).
( 12 ) Regulation  (EU)  2018/1139  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  4  July  2018  on  common  rules  in  the  field  of  civil aviation  and  establishing  a  European  Union  Aviation  Safety  Agency,  and  amending  Regulations  (EC)  No  2111/2005,  (EC) No 1008/2008, (EU) No 996/2010, (EU) No 376/2014 and Directives 2014/30/EU and 2014/53/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council, and repealing Regulations (EC) No 552/2004 and (EC) No 216/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council and Council Regulation (EEC) No 3922/91 (OJ L 212, , p. 1).
( 13 ) Directive (EU) 2022/2557 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 December 2022 on the resilience of critical entities and repealing Council Directive 2008/114/EC (see page 164 of this Official Journal). - (32) Upholding and preserving a reliable, resilient and secure domain name system (DNS) are key factors in maintaining the integrity of the internet and are essential for its continuous and stable operation, on which the digital economy and  society  depend.  Therefore,  this  Directive  should  apply  to  top-level-domain  (TLD)  name  registries,  and  DNS service  providers  that  are  to  be  understood  as  entities  providing  publicly  available  recursive  domain  name resolution  services  for  internet  end-users  or  authoritative  domain  name  resolution  services  for  third-party  usage. This Directive should not apply to root name servers.
- (33) Cloud  computing  services  should  cover  digital  services  that  enable  on-demand  administration  and  broad  remote access  to  a  scalable  and  elastic  pool  of  shareable  computing  resources,  including  where  such  resources  are distributed  across  several  locations.  Computing  resources  include  resources  such  as  networks,  servers  or  other infrastructure,  operating  systems,  software,  storage,  applications  and  services.  The  service  models  of  cloud computing include, inter alia, Infrastructure as  a Service (IaaS),  Platform  as  a  Service  (PaaS),  Software  as  a  Service (SaaS)  and  Network  as  a  Service  (NaaS).  The  deployment  models  of  cloud  computing  should  include  private, community, public and hybrid cloud. The cloud computing service and deployment models have the same meaning as the terms of service and deployment models defined under ISO/IEC 17788:2014 standard. The capability of the cloud computing user to unilaterally self-provision computing capabilities, such as server time or network storage, without  any  human  interaction  by  the  cloud  computing  service  provider  could  be  described  as  on-demand administration.
The  term  'broad  remote  access'  is  used  to  describe  that  the  cloud  capabilities  are  provided  over  the  network  and accessed  through  mechanisms  promoting  use  of  heterogeneous  thin  or  thick  client  platforms,  including  mobile phones,  tablets,  laptops  and  workstations.  The  term  'scalable'  refers  to  computing  resources  that  are  flexibly allocated by the cloud service provider, irrespective of the geographical location of the resources, in order to handle fluctuations  in  demand.  The  term  'elastic  pool'  is  used  to  describe  computing  resources  that  are  provided  and released according to demand in order to rapidly increase and decrease resources available depending on workload. The  term  'shareable'  is  used  to  describe  computing  resources  that  are  provided  to  multiple  users  who  share  a common access to the service, but where the processing is carried out separately for each user, although the service is provided from the same electronic equipment. The term 'distributed' is used to describe computing resources that are located on different networked computers or devices and which communicate and coordinate among themselves by message passing.
- (34) Given  the  emergence  of  innovative  technologies  and  new  business  models,  new  cloud  computing  service  and deployment models are expected to appear in the internal market in response to evolving customer needs. In that context,  cloud  computing  services  may  be  delivered  in  a  highly  distributed  form,  even  closer  to  where  data  are being generated or collected, thus moving from the traditional model to a highly distributed one (edge computing).
- (35) Services  offered  by  data  centre  service  providers  may  not  always  be  provided  in  the  form  of  a  cloud  computing service.  Accordingly,  data  centres  may not always constitute a part of cloud computing infrastructure. In order  to manage all the risks posed to the security of network and information systems, this Directive should therefore cover providers of data centre services that are not cloud computing services. For the purposes of this Directive, the term 'data  centre  service'  should  cover  provision  of  a  service  that  encompasses  structures,  or  groups  of  structures, dedicated  to  the  centralised  accommodation,  interconnection  and  operation  of  information  technology  (IT)  and network  equipment  providing  data  storage,  processing  and  transport  services  together  with  all  the  facilities  and infrastructures for power distribution and environmental control. The term 'data centre service' should not apply to in-house corporate data centres owned and operated by the entity concerned, for its own purposes.
- (36) Research activities play a key role in the development of new products and processes. Many of those activities are carried out by entities that share, disseminate or exploit the results of their research for commercial purposes. Those entities  can  therefore  be  important  players  in  value  chains,  which  makes  the  security  of  their  network  and information  systems  an  integral  part  of  the  overall  cybersecurity  of  the  internal  market.  Research  organisations should be understood to include entities which focus the essential part of their activities on the conduct of applied research  or  experimental  development,  within  the  meaning  of  the  Organisation  for  Economic  Cooperation  and Development's Frascati Manual 2015: Guidelines for Collecting and Reporting Data on Research and Experimental Development,  with  a  view  to  exploiting  their  results  for  commercial  purposes,  such  as  the  manufacturing  or development of a product or process, the provision of a service, or the marketing thereof.
- (37) The growing interdependencies are the result of an increasingly cross-border and interdependent network of service provision  using  key  infrastructures  across  the  Union  in  sectors  such  as  energy,  transport,  digital  infrastructure, drinking  water  and  waste  water,  health,  certain  aspects  of  public  administration,  as  well  as  space  in  so  far  as  the provision  of  certain  services  depending  on  ground-based  infrastructures  that  are  owned,  managed  and  operated either by Member States or by private parties is concerned, therefore not covering infrastructures owned, managed or operated by or on behalf of the Union as part of its space programme. Those interdependencies mean that any disruption,  even  one  initially  confined  to  one  entity  or  one  sector,  can  have  cascading  effects  more  broadly, potentially resulting in far-reaching and long-lasting negative impacts in the delivery of services across the internal market. The intensified cyberattacks during the COVID-19 pandemic have shown the vulnerability of increasingly interdependent societies in the face of low-probability risks.
- (38) In  view  of  the  differences  in  national  governance  structures  and  in  order  to  safeguard  already  existing  sectoral arrangements or Union supervisory and regulatory bodies, Member States should be able to designate or establish one or more competent authorities responsible for cybersecurity and for the supervisory tasks under this Directive.
- (39) In order to facilitate cross-border cooperation and communication among authorities and to enable this Directive to be implemented effectively, it is necessary for each Member State to designate a single point of contact responsible for coordinating issues related to the security of network and information systems and cross-border cooperation at Union level.
- (40) The  single  points  of  contact  should  ensure  effective  cross-border  cooperation  with  relevant  authorities  of  other Member  States  and,  where  appropriate,  with  the  Commission  and  ENISA.  The  single  points  of  contact  should therefore  be  tasked  with  forwarding  notifications  of  significant  incidents  with  cross-border  impact  to  the  single points  of  contact  of  other  affected  Member  States  upon  the  request  of  the  CSIRT or  the  competent  authority.  At national level, the single points of contact should enable smooth cross-sectoral cooperation with other competent authorities.  The  single  points  of  contact  could  also  be  the  addressees  of  relevant  information  about  incidents concerning financial entities from the competent authorities under Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 which they should be able to forward, as appropriate, to the CSIRTs or the competent authorities under this Directive.
- (41) Member States should be adequately equipped, in terms of both technical and organisational capabilities, to prevent, detect,  respond  to  and  mitigate  incidents  and  risks.  Member  States  should  therefore  establish  or  designate  one  or more  CSIRTs  under  this  Directive  and  ensure  that  they  have  adequate  resources  and  technical  capabilities.  The CSIRTs  should  comply  with  the  requirements  laid  down  in  this  Directive  in  order  to  guarantee  effective  and compatible capabilities to deal with incidents and risks and to ensure efficient cooperation at Union level. Member States  should  be  able  to  designate  existing  computer  emergency  response  teams  (CERTs)  as  CSIRTs.  In  order  to enhance the trust relationship between the entities and the CSIRTs, where a CSIRT is part of a competent authority, Member  States  should  be  able  to  consider  functional  separation  between  the  operational  tasks  provided  by  the CSIRTs, in particular in relation to information sharing and assistance provided to the entities, and the supervisory activities of the competent authorities.
- (42) The CSIRTs are tasked with incident handling. This includes the processing of large volumes of sometimes sensitive data. Member States should ensure that the CSIRTs have an infrastructure for information sharing and processing, as well as well-equipped staff, which ensures the confidentiality and trustworthiness of their operations. The CSIRTs could also adopt codes of conduct in that respect. - (43) As regards personal data, the CSIRTs should be able to provide, in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2016/679, upon the request of an essential or important entity, a proactive scanning of the network and information systems used for the  provision  of  the  entity's  services.  Where  applicable,  Member  States  should  aim  to  ensure  an  equal  level  of technical  capabilities  for  all  sectoral  CSIRTs.  Member  States  should  be  able  to  request  the  assistance  of  ENISA  in developing their CSIRTs.
- (44) The CSIRTs should have the ability, upon an essential or important entity's request, to monitor the entity's internetfacing  assets,  both  on  and  off  premises,  in  order to  identify,  understand  and  manage  the  entity's  overall organisational  risks  as  regards  newly  identified  supply  chain  compromises  or  critical  vulnerabilities.  The  entity should  be  encouraged  to  communicate  to  the  CSIRT whether  it  runs  a  privileged  management  interface,  as  this could affect the speed of undertaking mitigating actions.
- (45) Given  the  importance  of  international  cooperation  on  cybersecurity,  the  CSIRTs  should  be  able  to  participate  in international cooperation networks in addition to the CSIRTs network established by this Directive. Therefore, for the  purpose  of  carrying  out  their  tasks,  the  CSIRTs  and  the  competent  authorities  should  be  able  to  exchange information,  including  personal  data,  with  the  national  computer  security  incident  response  teams  or  competent authorities of third countries provided that the conditions under Union data protection law for transfers of personal data to third countries, inter alia those of Article 49 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679, are met.
- (46) Ensuring adequate resources to meet the objectives of this Directive and to enable the competent authorities and the CSIRTs to carry out the tasks laid down herein is essential. The Member States can introduce at the national level a financing  mechanism  to  cover  necessary  expenditure  in  relation  to  the  conduct  of  tasks  of  public  entities responsible for cybersecurity in the Member State pursuant to this Directive. Such mechanism should comply with Union law and should be proportionate and non-discriminatory and should take into account different approaches to providing secure services.
- (47) The CSIRTs network should continue to contribute to strengthening confidence and trust and to promote swift and effective operational cooperation among Member States. In order to enhance operational cooperation at Union level, the  CSIRTs  network  should  consider  inviting  Union bodies  and  agencies involved  in  cybersecurity  policy,  such as Europol, to participate in its work.
- (48) For  the  purpose  of  achieving  and  maintaining  a  high  level  of  cybersecurity,  the  national  cybersecurity  strategies required under this Directive should consist of coherent frameworks providing strategic objectives and priorities in the  area  of  cybersecurity  and  the  governance  to  achieve  them.  Those  strategies  can  be  composed  of one  or  more legislative or non-legislative instruments.
- (49) Cyber  hygiene  policies  provide  the  foundations  for  protecting  network  and  information  system  infrastructures, hardware, software and online application security, and business or end-user data upon which entities rely. Cyber hygiene  policies  comprising  a  common  baseline  set  of  practices,  including  software  and  hardware  updates, password changes,  the management of new installs,  the  limitation  of administrator-level  access  accounts,  and  the backing-up  of  data,  enable  a  proactive  framework  of  preparedness  and  overall  safety  and  security  in  the  event  of incidents or cyber threats. ENISA should monitor and analyse Member States' cyber hygiene policies.
- (50) Cybersecurity awareness and cyber hygiene are essential to enhance the level of cybersecurity within the Union, in particular  in  light  of  the  growing  number  of  connected  devices  that  are  increasingly  used  in  cyberattacks.  Efforts should be made to enhance the overall awareness of risks related to such devices, while assessments at Union level could help ensure a common understanding of such risks within the internal market. - (51) Member States should encourage the use of any innovative technology, including artificial  intelligence, the  use  of which  could  improve  the  detection  and  prevention  of  cyberattacks,  enabling  resources  to  be  diverted  towards cyberattacks  more  effectively.  Member  States  should  therefore  encourage  in  their  national  cybersecurity  strategy activities  in  research  and  development  to  facilitate  the  use  of  such  technologies,  in  particular  those  relating  to automated or semi-automated tools in cybersecurity,  and,  where  relevant,  the  sharing  of  data  needed  for  training users of such technology and for improving it. The use of any innovative technology, including artificial intelligence, should  comply  with  Union  data  protection  law,  including  the  data  protection  principles  of  data  accuracy,  data minimisation, fairness and transparency, and data security, such as state-of-the-art encryption. The requirements of data protection by design and by default laid down in Regulation (EU) 2016/679 should be fully exploited.
- (52) Open-source  cybersecurity  tools  and  applications  can  contribute  to  a  higher  degree  of  openness  and  can  have  a positive  impact  on  the  efficiency  of  industrial  innovation.  Open  standards  facilitate  interoperability  between security tools, benefitting the security of industrial stakeholders. Open-source cybersecurity tools and applications can leverage the wider developer community, enabling diversification of suppliers. Open source can lead to a more transparent  verification  process  of  cybersecurity  related  tools  and  a  community-driven  process  of  discovering vulnerabilities.  Member  States  should  therefore  be  able  to  promote  the  use  of  open-source  software  and  open standards  by  pursuing  policies  relating  to  the  use  of  open  data  and  open-source  as  part  of  security  through transparency.  Policies  promoting  the  introduction  and  sustainable  use  of  open-source  cybersecurity  tools  are  of particular  importance  for  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  facing  significant  costs  for  implementation,  which could be minimised by reducing the need for specific applications or tools.
- (53) Utilities  are  increasingly  connected  to  digital  networks  in  cities,  for  the  purpose  of  improving  urban  transport networks,  upgrading  water  supply  and  waste  disposal  facilities  and  increasing  the  efficiency  of  lighting  and  the heating  of  buildings.  Those  digitalised  utilities  are  vulnerable  to  cyberattacks  and  run  the  risk,  in  the  event  of  a successful  cyberattack,  of  harming  citizens  at  a  large  scale  due  to  their  interconnectedness.  Member  States  should develop  a  policy  that  addresses  the  development  of  such  connected  or  smart  cities,  and  their  potential  effects  on society, as part of their national cybersecurity strategy.
- (54) In recent years, the Union has faced an exponential increase in ransomware attacks, in which malware encrypts data and  systems  and  demands  a  ransom  payment  for  release.  The  increasing  frequency  and  severity  of  ransomware attacks  can  be  driven  by  several  factors,  such  as  different  attack  patterns,  criminal  business  models  around 'ransomware  as  a  service'  and  cryptocurrencies,  ransom  demands,  and  the  rise  of  supply  chain  attacks.  Member States  should  develop  a  policy  addressing  the  rise  of  ransomware  attacks  as  part  of  their  national  cybersecurity strategy.
- (55) Public-private partnerships (PPPs) in the field of cybersecurity can provide an appropriate framework for knowledge exchange,  the  sharing  of  best  practices  and  the  establishment  of  a  common  level  of  understanding  among stakeholders.  Member  States  should  promote  policies  underpinning  the  establishment  of  cybersecurity-specific PPPs.  Those  policies  should  clarify,  inter  alia,  the  scope  and  stakeholders  involved,  the  governance  model,  the available  funding  options  and  the  interaction  among  participating  stakeholders  with  regard  to  PPPs.  PPPs  can leverage  the  expertise  of  private-sector  entities  to  assist  the  competent  authorities  in  developing  state-of-the-art services  and  processes  including  information  exchange,  early  warnings,  cyber  threat  and  incident  exercises,  crisis management and resilience planning.
- (56) Member States should, in their national cybersecurity strategies, address the specific cybersecurity needs of small and medium-sized enterprises. Small and medium-sized enterprises represent, across the Union, a large percentage of the industrial and business market and often struggle to adapt to new business practices in a more connected world and to the digital environment, with employees working from home and business increasingly being conducted online. Some small and medium-sized enterprises face specific cybersecurity challenges such as low cyber-awareness, a lack of remote IT security, the high cost of cybersecurity solutions and an increased level of threat, such as ransomware, for  which  they  should  receive  guidance  and  assistance.  Small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  are  increasingly becoming the target of supply chain attacks due to their less rigorous cybersecurity risk-management measures and attack management, and the fact that they have limited security resources. Such supply chain attacks not only have an impact on small and medium-sized enterprises and their operations in isolation but can also have a cascading effect  on  larger  attacks  on  entities  to which  they  provided  supplies.  Member  States  should,  through  their  national 
cybersecurity  strategies,  help  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  to  address  the  challenges  faced  in  their  supply chains.  Member  States  should  have  a  point  of  contact  for  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  at  national  or regional level, which either provides guidance and assistance to small and medium-sized enterprises or directs them to the appropriate bodies for guidance and assistance with regard to cybersecurity related issues. Member States are also encouraged to offer services such as website configuration and logging enabling to microenterprises and small enterprises that lack those capabilities.
- (57) As part of their  national cybersecurity strategies, Member States should adopt policies on the promotion of active cyber protection as part of a wider defensive strategy. Rather than responding reactively, active cyber protection is the  prevention,  detection,  monitoring,  analysis  and  mitigation  of  network  security  breaches  in  an  active  manner, combined with the use of capabilities deployed within and outside the victim network. This could include Member States offering free services or  tools to certain entities, including self-service checks, detection tools and takedown services.  The  ability  to  rapidly  and  automatically  share  and  understand  threat  information  and  analysis,  cyber activity  alerts,  and  response  action  is  critical  to  enable  a  unity  of  effort  in  successfully  preventing,  detecting, addressing  and  blocking  attacks  against  network  and  information  systems.  Active  cyber  protection  is  based  on  a defensive strategy that excludes offensive measures.
- (58) Since the exploitation of vulnerabilities in network and information systems may cause significant disruption and harm,  swiftly  identifying  and  remedying  such  vulnerabilities  is  an  important  factor  in  reducing  risk.  Entities  that develop  or  administer  network  and  information  systems  should  therefore  establish  appropriate  procedures  to handle  vulnerabilities  when  they  are  discovered.  