( 4 ) Position  of  the  European  Parliament  of  13  March  2024  (not  yet  published  in  the  Official  Journal)  and  decision  of  the  Council  of 21 May 2024.
guaranteeing the uniform protection of overriding reasons of public interest and of rights of persons throughout the internal market on the basis of Article 114 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU). To the extent that this Regulation contains specific rules on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data concerning restrictions of the use of AI systems for remote biometric identification for the purpose of law  enforcement,  of  the  use  of  AI  systems  for  risk  assessments  of  natural  persons  for  the  purpose  of  law enforcement  and  of  the  use  of  AI  systems  of  biometric  categorisation  for  the  purpose  of  law  enforcement,  it  is appropriate to base this Regulation, in so far as those specific rules are concerned, on Article 16 TFEU. In light of those specific  rules and the recourse to Article 16 TFEU, it is appropriate to consult the European Data Protection Board.
- (4) AI is a fast evolving family of technologies that contributes to a wide array of economic, environmental and societal benefits across the entire spectrum of industries and social activities. By improving prediction, optimising operations and resource allocation, and personalising digital solutions available for individuals and organisations, the use of AI can  provide  key  competitive  advantages  to  undertakings  and  support  socially  and  environmentally  beneficial outcomes,  for  example  in  healthcare,  agriculture,  food  safety,  education  and  training,  media,  sports,  culture, infrastructure  management,  energy,  transport  and  logistics,  public  services,  security,  justice,  resource  and  energy efficiency,  environmental monitoring,  the conservation and restoration of biodiversity and ecosystems and climate change mitigation  and  adaptation.
- (5) At the same time, depending on the circumstances regarding its specific application, use, and level of technological development, AI may generate risks and cause harm to public interests and fundamental rights that are protected by Union  law.  Such  harm  might  be  material  or  immaterial,  including  physical,  psychological,  societal  or  economic harm.
- (6) Given the major impact that AI can have on society and the need to build trust, it is vital for AI and its regulatory framework to be developed in accordance with Union values as enshrined in Article 2 of  the Treaty on European Union  (TEU),  the  fundamental  rights  and  freedoms  enshrined  in  the  Treaties  and,  pursuant  to  Article  6  TEU,  the Charter. As a prerequisite, AI should be a human-centric technology. It should serve as a tool for  people, with the ultimate aim  of  increasing  human well-being.
- (7) In  order  to  ensure  a  consistent  and  high  level  of  protection  of  public  interests  as  regards  health,  safety  and fundamental rights, common rules for high-risk AI systems should be established. Those rules should be consistent with  the  Charter,  non-discriminatory  and  in  line  with  the  Union's  international  trade  commitments.  They  should also  take  into  account  the  European  Declaration  on  Digital  Rights  and  Principles  for  the  Digital  Decade  and  the Ethics  guidelines  for  trustworthy  AI  of  the  High-Level  Expert  Group  on  Artificial  Intelligence  (AI  HLEG).
- (8) A Union legal framework laying down harmonised rules on AI is therefore needed to foster  the development, use and uptake of AI in the internal market that at the same time meets a high level of protection of public interests, such as  health  and  safety  and  the  protection  of  fundamental  rights,  including  democracy,  the  rule  of law  and environmental protection as recognised and protected by Union law. To achieve that objective, rules regulating the placing on the market, the putting into service and the use of certain AI systems should be laid down, thus ensuring the  smooth  functioning  of  the  internal  market  and  allowing  those  systems  to  benefit  from  the  principle  of  free movement  of  goods  and  services.  