Text and data mining techniques may be used extensively in this context for  the retrieval and analysis of such content, which may be protected by copyright and related  rights.  Any  use  of  copyright  protected  content  requires  the  authorisation  of  the  rightsholder  concerned unless  relevant  copyright  exceptions  and  limitations  apply.  Directive  (EU)  2019/790  introduced  exceptions  and limitations allowing reproductions and extractions of works or other subject matter, for the purpose of text and data
( 40 ) Directive (EU) 2019/790 of  the European Parliament and of  the Council of 17 April 2019 on copyright and related rights in the Digital  Single  Market  and  amending  Directives  96/9/EC  and  2001/29/EC  (OJ  L  130,  ,  p.  92).
- mining,  under  certain  conditions.  Under  these  rules,  rightsholders  may  choose  to  reserve  their  rights  over  their works  or  other  subject  matter  to  prevent  text  and  data  mining,  unless  this  is  done  for  the  purposes  of  scientific research.  Where  the  rights  to  opt  out  has  been  expressly  reserved  in  an  appropriate  manner,  providers  of general-purpose  AI  models  need  to  obtain  an  authorisation  from  rightsholders  if  they  want  to  carry  out  text  and data  mining  over  such  works.
- (106) Providers  that  place  general-purpose  AI  models  on  the  Union  market  should  ensure  compliance  with  the  relevant obligations in this Regulation. To that end, providers of general-purpose AI models should put in place a policy to comply with Union law on copyright and related rights, in particular to identify and comply with the reservation of rights  expressed  by  rightsholders  pursuant  to  Article  4(3)  of  Directive  (EU)  2019/790.  Any  provider  placing a general-purpose AI model on the Union market should comply with this obligation, regardless of the jurisdiction in which the copyright-relevant acts underpinning the training of those general-purpose AI models take place. This is necessary to ensure a level playing field among providers of general-purpose AI models where no provider should be  able  to  gain  a  competitive  advantage  in  the  Union  market  by  applying  lower  copyright  standards  than  those provided  in  the  Union.
