The  notifying  authority  shall  notify  the  Commission  and  the  other  Member  States  of  any  relevant  changes  to  the notification  of  a  notified  body  via  the  electronic  notification  tool  referred  to  in  Article  30(2).
- 2. The procedures laid down in Articles  29  and  30  shall  apply  to  extensions  of  the  scope  of  the  notification.
For changes to the notification other  than extensions of its scope, the procedures laid down in paragraphs (3) to (9) shall apply.
- 3. Where a notified body decides to cease its conformity assessment activities, it shall inform the notifying authority and the  providers  concerned  as  soon  as  possible  and,  in  the  case  of  a  planned  cessation,  at  least  one  year  before  ceasing  its activities. The certificates of the notified body may remain valid for a period of nine months after cessation of the notified body's activities, on condition that another notified body has confirmed in writing that it will assume responsibilities for the high-risk AI systems covered by those certificates. The latter notified body shall complete a full assessment of the high-risk AI  systems  affected  by  the  end  of  that  nine-month-period  before  issuing  new  certificates  for  those  systems.  Where  the notified  body  has  ceased  its  activity,  the  notifying  authority  shall  withdraw  the  designation.
- 4. Where a notifying authority has sufficient reason to consider  that a notified body no longer meets the requirements laid down in Article 31, or that it is failing to fulfil its obligations, the notifying authority shall without delay investigate the matter  with the utmost diligence. In that context, it shall inform the notified body concerned about the objections raised and give it the possibility to make its views known. If the notifying authority comes to the conclusion that the notified body no longer meets the requirements laid down in Article 31 or that it is failing to fulfil its obligations, it shall restrict, suspend or withdraw the designation as appropriate, depending on the seriousness of the failure to meet those requirements or fulfil those  obligations.  It  shall  immediately  inform  the  Commission  and  the  other  Member  States  accordingly.
- 5. Where its designation has been suspended, restricted, or fully or partially withdrawn, the notified body shall inform the  providers  concerned  within  10  days.
- 6. In  the  event  of  the  restriction,  suspension  or  withdrawal  of  a  designation,  the  notifying  authority  shall  take appropriate steps to ensure that the files of the notified body concerned are kept, and to make them available to notifying authorities  in  other  Member  States  and  to  market  surveillance  authorities  at  their  request.
