Those competent authorities should have all powers under this Regulation and Regulation  (EU)  2019/1020  to  enforce  the  requirements  and  obligations  of  this  Regulation,  including  powers  to carry our ex post market surveillance activities that can be integrated, as appropriate, into their existing supervisory mechanisms and procedures under the relevant Union financial services law. It is appropriate to envisage that, when acting  as  market  surveillance  authorities  under this  Regulation,  the  national  authorities  responsible  for the supervision  of  credit  institutions  regulated  under  Directive  2013/36/EU,  which  are  participating  in  the  Single Supervisory Mechanism established by Council Regulation (EU) No 1024/2013 ( 52 ), should report, without delay, to the European Central Bank any information identified in the course of their market surveillance activities that may be of potential interest for the European Central Bank's prudential supervisory tasks as specified in that Regulation. To further enhance the consistency between this Regulation and the rules applicable to credit institutions regulated under  Directive  2013/36/EU,  it  is  also  appropriate  to  integrate  some  of  the  providers'  procedural  obligations  in relation  to  risk  management,  post  marketing  monitoring  and  documentation  into  the  existing  obligations  and procedures under Directive 2013/36/EU. In order to avoid overlaps, limited derogations should also be envisaged in relation  to  the  quality  management  system  of  providers  and  the  monitoring  obligation  placed  on  deployers  of high-risk  AI  systems  to  the  extent  that  these  apply  to  credit  institutions  regulated  by  Directive  2013/36/EU.  The same  regime  should  apply  to  insurance  and  re-insurance  undertakings  and  insurance  holding  companies  under Directive 2009/138/EC and the insurance intermediaries under Directive (EU) 2016/97 and other types of financial institutions subject to requirements regarding internal governance, arrangements or processes established pursuant to  the  relevant  Union  financial  services  law  to  ensure  consistency  and  equal  treatment  in  the  financial  sector.
- (159) Each market surveillance authority for high-risk  AI systems in the  area of  biometrics, as  listed in  an  annex  to  this Regulation  insofar  as  those  systems  are  used  for  the  purposes  of  law  enforcement,  migration,  asylum  and  border control management, or  the administration of justice and democratic processes, should have effective investigative and corrective powers, including at least the power to obtain access to all personal data that are being processed and to all  information necessary for  the performance of its tasks. The market surveillance authorities should be able to exercise their powers by acting with complete independence. Any limitations of their access to sensitive operational data under this Regulation should be without prejudice to the powers conferred to  them by Directive (EU) 2016/680. No exclusion on disclosing data to national data protection authorities under this Regulation should affect  the  current  or  future  powers  of  those  authorities  beyond  the  scope  of  this  Regulation.
- (160) The market surveillance authorities and the Commission should be able to propose joint activities, including joint investigations, to be conducted by market surveillance authorities or market surveillance authorities jointly with the Commission,  that  have  the  aim  of  promoting  compliance,  identifying  non-compliance,  raising  awareness  and providing guidance in relation to this Regulation with respect to specific categories of high-risk AI systems that are found to present a serious risk across two or more Member States. Joint activities to promote compliance should be carried out in accordance with Article 9 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020. The AI Office should provide coordination support for  joint  investigations.
- (161) It is necessary to clarify the responsibilities and competences at Union and national level as regards AI systems that are  built  on  general-purpose  AI  models.  To  avoid  overlapping  competences,  where  an  AI  system  is  based  on a  general-purpose AI model and the model and system are provided by the same provider, the supervision should
- ( 49 ) Directive 2013/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on access to the activity of credit institutions and  the  prudential  supervision  of  credit  institutions  and  investment  firms,  amending  Directive  2002/87/EC  and  repealing Directives  2006/48/EC  and  2006/49/EC (OJ  L  176,  ,  p.  338).
- ( 50 ) Directive  2014/17/EU  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  4  February  2014  on  credit  agreements  for  consumers relating to residential immovable  property and amending  Directives  2008/48/EC  and 2013/36/EU  and  Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 (OJ L 60, , p. 34).
- ( 51 ) Directive  (EU)  2016/97  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  20  January  2016  on  insurance  distribution  (OJ  L  26, ,  p.  19).
