## Purpose
To preserve information security when executing changes.
## Guidance
Introduction of new systems and major changes to existing systems should follow agreed rules and a formal process of documentation, specification, testing, quality control and managed implementation. Management  responsibilities  and  procedures  should  be  in  place  to  ensure  satisfactory  control  of all changes.
Change  control  procedures  should  be  documented  and  enforced  to  ensure  the  confidentiality, integrity and availability of information in information processing facilities and information systems, for  the  entire  system  development  life  cycle  from  the  early  design  stages  through  all  subsequent maintenance efforts.
Wherever  practicable,  change  control  procedures  for  ICT  infrastructure  and  software  should be integrated.
The change control procedures should include:
- a) planning and assessing the potential impact of changes considering all dependencies;
- b) authorization of changes;
- c) communicating changes to relevant interested parties;
- d) tests and acceptance of tests for the changes (see  );
- e) implementation of changes including deployment plans;
- f) emergency and contingency considerations including fall-back procedures;
- g) maintaining records of changes that include all of the above;
- h) ensuring that operating documentation (see ) and user procedures are changed as necessary to remain appropriate;
- i) ensuring that ICT continuity plans and response and recovery procedures (see ) are changed as necessary to remain appropriate.
## Other information
Inadequate  control  of  changes  to  information  processing  facilities  and  information  systems  is  a common cause of system or security failures. Changes to the production environment, especially when transferring software from development to operational environment, can impact on the integrity and availability of applications.
Changing software can impact the production environment and vice versa.
Good practice  includes  the  testing  of  ICT  components  in  an  environment  segregated  from  both  the production and development environments (see ). This provides a means of having control over new software and allowing additional protection of operational information that is used for testing purposes. This should include patches, service packs and other updates.
Production environment includes operating systems, databases and middleware platforms. The control should be applied for changes of applications and infrastructures.
##  Test information
| Control type   | Information security properties   | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities   | Security domains   |
|----------------|-----------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|--------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity       | #Protect                 | #Information_protection    | #Protection        |
## Control
Test information should be appropriately selected, protected and managed.
## Purpose
To ensure relevance of testing and protection of operational information used for testing.
## Guidance
Test information should be selected to ensure the reliability of tests results and the confidentiality of the relevant operational information. Sensitive information (including personally identifiable information) should not be copied into the development and testing environments (see ).
The following guidelines should be applied to protect the copies of operational information, when used for testing purposes, whether the test environment is built in-house or on a cloud service:
- a) applying the same access control procedures to test environments as those applied to operational environments;
- b) having a separate authorization each time operational information is copied to a test environment;
- c) logging the copying and use of operational information to provide an audit trail;
- d) protecting sensitive information by removal or masking (see  ) if used for testing;
- e) properly deleting (see ) operational information from a test environment immediately after the testing is complete to prevent unauthorized use of test information.
Test information should be securely stored (to prevent tampering, which can otherwise lead to invalid results) and only used for testing purposes.
## Other information
System and acceptance testing can require substantial volumes of test information that are as close as possible to operational information.
##  Protection of information systems during audit testing
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities                              | Security domains                         |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #System_and_network_ security #Information_protection | #Governance_and_ Ecosystem #Protec- tion |
## Control
## SS- ISO/IEC 27002:2022 (E)
Audit  tests  and  other  assurance  activities  involving  assessment  of  operational  systems  should  be planned and agreed between the tester and appropriate management.
## Purpose
To  minimize  the  impact  of  audit  and  other  assurance  activities  on  operational  systems  and business processes.
## Guidance
The following guidelines should be observed:
- a) agreeing audit requests for access to systems and data with appropriate management;
- b) agreeing and controlling the scope of technical audit tests;
- c) limiting audit tests to read-only access to software and data. 