restrictions  on  the  use  of utility programs (see  )], which can arise during job execution;
- g) support and escalation contacts including external support contacts in the event of unexpected operational or technical difficulties;
- h) storage media handling instructions (see  and  );
- i) system restart and recovery procedures for use in the event of system failure;
- j) the management of audit trail and system log information (see  and ) and video monitoring systems (see  );
- k) monitoring procedures such as capacity, performance and security (see  and  );
- l) maintenance instructions.
Documented  operating  procedures  should  be  reviewed  and  updated  when  needed.  Changes  to documented  operating  procedures  should  be  authorized.  Where  technically  feasible,  information systems should be managed consistently, using the same procedures, tools and utilities.
## Other information
No other information.
## 6 People controls
##  Screening
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities   | Security domains           |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #Human_resource_ security  | #Governance_and_ Ecosystem |
## Control
Background verification checks on all candidates to become personnel should be carried out prior to joining the organization and on an ongoing basis taking into consideration applicable laws, regulations and ethics and be proportional to the business requirements, the classification of the information to be accessed and the perceived risks.
## Purpose
To ensure all personnel are eligible and suitable for the roles for which they are considered and remain eligible and suitable during their employment.
## Guidance
A screening process should be performed for all personnel including full-time, part-time and temporary staff.  Where these individuals are contracted through suppliers of services, screening requirements should be included in the contractual agreements between the organization and the suppliers.
Information on all candidates being considered for positions within the organization should be collected and handled taking into consideration any appropriate legislation existing in the relevant jurisdiction.
In  some jurisdictions, the organization can be legally required to inform the candidates beforehand about the screening activities.
Verification should take into consideration all relevant privacy, PII protection and employment-based legislation and should, where permitted, include the following:
- a) availability of satisfactory references (e.g. business and personal references);
- b) a verification (for completeness and accuracy) of the applicant's curriculum vitae;
- c) confirmation of claimed academic and professional qualifications;
- d) independent identity verification (e.g. passport or other acceptable document issued by appropriate authorities);
- e) more detailed verification, such as credit review or review of criminal records if the candidate takes on a critical role.
When an individual is hired for a specific information security role, the organization should make sure the candidate:
- a) has the necessary competence to perform the security role;
- b) can be trusted to take on the role, especially if the role is critical for the organization.
Where  a  job,  either  on  initial  appointment  or  on  promotion,  involves  the  person  having  access  to information processing facilities and, in particular, if these involve handling confidential information (e.g.  financial information, personal information or health care information) the organization should also consider further, more detailed verifications.
Procedures should define criteria and limitations for verification reviews (e.g. who is eligible to screen people and how, when and why verification reviews are carried out).
In situations where verification cannot be completed in a timely manner, mitigating controls should be implemented until the review has been finished, for example:
- a) delayed onboarding;
- b) delayed deployment of corporate assets;
- c) onboarding with reduced access;
- d) termination of employment.
Verification  checks  should  be  repeated  periodically  to  confirm  ongoing  suitability  of  personnel, depending on the criticality of a person's role.
## Other information
No other information.
##  Terms and conditions of employment
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities   | Security domains           |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #Human_resource_ security  | #Governance_and_ Ecosystem |
## Control
The  employment  contractual  agreements  should  state  the  personnel's and  the organization's responsibilities for information security.
## Purpose
To ensure personnel understand their information security responsibilities for the roles for which they are considered.
## Guidance
The contractual obligations for personnel should take into consideration the organization's information security policy and relevant topic-specific policies. In addition, the following points can be clarified and stated:
- a) confidentiality or non-disclosure agreements that personnel who are given access to confidential information  should  sign  prior  to  being  given  access  to  information  and  other  associated assets (see  );
- b) legal responsibilities and rights [e.g. regarding copyright laws or data protection legislation (see  and  )];
- c) responsibilities  for  the  classification  of  information  and  management  of  the  organization's information and other associated assets, information processing facilities and information services handled by the personnel (see  to  );
- d) responsibilities for the handling of information received from interested parties;
- e) actions to be taken if personnel disregard the organization's security requirements (see ).
Information security roles and responsibilities should be communicated to candidates during the preemployment process.
The organization should ensure that personnel agree to terms and conditions concerning information security. These terms and conditions should be appropriate to the nature and extent of access they will have to the organization's assets associated with information systems and services. The terms and conditions concerning information security should be reviewed when laws, regulations, the information security policy or topic-specific policies change.
Where appropriate, responsibilities contained within the terms and conditions of employment should continue for a defined period after the end of the employment (see ).
## Other information
A  code  of  conduct  can  be  used  to  state  personnel's  information  security  responsibilities  regarding confidentiality,  PII  protection,  ethics,  appropriate  use  of  the  organization's  information  and  other associated assets, as well as reputable practices expected by the organization.
An  external  party,  with  which  supplier  personnel  are  associated,  can  be  required  to  enter  into contractual agreements on behalf of the contracted individual.
If  the  organization  is  not  a  legal  entity  and  does  not  have  employees,  the  equivalent  of  contractual agreement and terms and conditions can be considered in line with the guidance of this control.
##  Information security awareness, education and training
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities   | Security domains           |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #Human_resource_ security  | #Governance_and_ Ecosystem |
## Control
Personnel of the organization and relevant interested parties should receive appropriate information security  awareness,  education  and  training  and  regular  updates  of  the  organization's  information security policy, topic-specific policies and procedures, as relevant for their job function.
## Purpose
To ensure personnel and relevant interested parties are aware of and fulfil their information security responsibilities.
## Guidance
## General
An information security awareness, education and training programme should be established in line with the organization's information security policy, topic-specific policies and relevant procedures on information security, taking into consideration the organization's information to be protected and the information security controls that have been implemented to protect the information.
Information  security  awareness,  education  and  training  should  take  place  periodically.  Initial awareness,  education  and  training  can  apply  to  new  personnel  and  to  those  who  transfer  to  new positions or roles with substantially different information security requirements.
Personnel's understanding should be assessed at the end of an awareness, education or training activity to test knowledge transfer and the effectiveness of the awareness, education and training programme.
## Awareness
An  information  security  awareness  programme  should  aim  to  make  personnel  aware  of  their responsibilities for information security and the means by which those responsibilities are discharged.
The awareness programme should be planned taking into consideration the roles of personnel in the organization, including internal and external personnel (e.g. external consultants, supplier personnel). The activities  in  the  awareness  programme  should  be  scheduled  over  time,  preferably  regularly,  so that the activities are repeated and cover new personnel. It should also be built on lessons learnt from information security incidents.
The awareness programme should include a number of awareness-raising activities via appropriate physical or virtual channels such as campaigns, booklets, posters, newsletters, websites, information sessions, briefings, e-learning modules and e-mails.
Information security awareness should cover general aspects such as:
- a) management's commitment to information security throughout the organization;
- b) familiarity and compliance needs concerning applicable information security rules and obligations, taking  into  account  information  security  policy  and  topic-specific  policies,  standards,  laws, statutes, regulations, contracts and agreements;
- c) personal accountability for one's own actions and inactions, and general responsibilities towards securing or protecting information belonging to the organization and interested parties;
- d) basic information security procedures [e.g. information security event reporting ( )] and baseline controls [e.g. password security ( )];
- e) contact  points  and  resources  for  additional  information  and  advice  on  information  security matters, including further information security awareness materials.
## Education and training
The organization should identify, prepare and implement an appropriate training plan for technical teams whose roles require specific skill sets and expertise. Technical teams should have the skills for configuring and maintaining the required security level for devices, systems, applications and services. If there are missing skills, the organization should take action and acquire them.
The education and training programme should consider different forms [e.g. lectures or self-studies, being mentored by expert staff or consultants (on-the-job training), rotating staff members to follow different activities, recruiting already skilled people and hiring consultants]. It can use different means of delivery including classroom-based, distance learning, web-based, self-paced and others. Technical personnel should keep their knowledge up to date by subscribing to newsletters and magazines or by attending conferences and events aimed at technical and professional improvement.
## Other information
When composing an awareness programme, it is important not only to focus on the 'what' and 'how', but also the 'why', when possible. It is important that personnel understand the aim of information security and the potential effect, positive and negative, on the organization of their own behaviour.
Information security awareness, education and training can be part of, or conducted in collaboration with,  other  activities,  for  example  general  information  management,  ICT,  security,  privacy  or safety training.
##  Disciplinary process
| Control type              | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities   | Security domains           |
|---------------------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|
| #Preventive #Cor- rective | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect #Respond        | #Human_resource_ security  | #Governance_and_ Ecosystem |
## Control
A disciplinary process should be formalized and communicated to take actions against personnel and other relevant interested parties who have committed an information security policy violation.
## Purpose
To ensure personnel and other relevant interested parties understand the consequences of information security policy violation, to deter and appropriately deal with personnel and other relevant interested parties who committed the violation.
## Guidance
The disciplinary process should not be initiated without prior verification that an information security policy violation has occurred (see ).
The formal disciplinary process should provide for a graduated response that takes into consideration factors such as:
- a) the nature (who, what, when, how) and gravity of the breach and its consequences;
- b) whether the offence was intentional (malicious) or unintentional (accidental);
- c) whether or not this is a first or repeated offence;
- d) whether or not the violator was properly trained.
The  response  should  take  into  consideration  relevant  legal,  statutory,  regulatory  contractual  and business requirements as well as other factors as required. The disciplinary process should also be used  as  a  deterrent  to  prevent  personnel  and  other  relevant  interested  parties  from  violating  the information security policy, topic-specific policies and procedures for information security. Deliberate information security policy violations can require immediate actions.
## Other information
Where possible, the identity of individuals subject to disciplinary action should be protected in line with applicable requirements.
When individuals demonstrate excellent behaviour with regard to information security, they can be rewarded to promote information security and encourage good behaviour.
##  Responsibilities	after	termination	or	change	of	employment
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities                    | Security domains           |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|---------------------------------------------|----------------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #Human_resource_ security #Asset_management | #Governance_and_ Ecosystem |
## Control
Information  security  responsibilities  and  duties  that  remain  valid  after  termination  or  change of  employment  should  be  defined,  enforced  and  communicated  to  relevant  personnel  and  other interested parties.
## Purpose
To protect the organization's interests as part of the process of changing or terminating employment or contracts.
## Guidance
The  process  for  managing  termination  or  change  of  employment  should  define  which  information security  responsibilities  and  duties  should  remain  valid  after  termination  or  change.  This  can include confidentiality of information, intellectual property and other knowledge obtained, as well as responsibilities contained within any other confidentiality agreement (see ).  Responsibilities and duties still valid after termination of employment or contract should be contained in the individual's terms and conditions of employment (see ), contract or agreement. Other contracts or agreements that  continue  for  a  defined  period  after  the  end  of  the  individual's  employment  can  also  contain information security responsibilities.
Changes  of  responsibility  or  employment  should  be  managed  as  the  termination  of  the  current responsibility or employment combined with the initiation of the new responsibility or employment.
Information security roles and responsibilities held by any individual who leaves or changes job roles should be identified and transferred to another individual.
A process should be established for the communication of the changes and of operating procedures to personnel, other interested parties and relevant contact persons (e.g. to customers and suppliers).
The process for the termination or change of employment should also be applied to external personnel (i.e. suppliers) when a termination occurs of personnel, the contract or the job with the organization, or when there is a change of the job within the organization.
## Other information
In many organizations, the human resources function is generally responsible for the overall termination process and works together with the supervising manager of the person transitioning to manage the information security aspects of the relevant procedures. In the case of personnel provided through an external party (e.g. through a supplier), this termination process is undertaken by the external party in accordance with the contract between the organization and the external party.
##  Confidentiality	or	non-disclosure	agreements
| Control type   | Information security properties   | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities                                                 | Security domains           |
|----------------|-----------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality                  | #Protect                 | #Human_resource_security #Information_protection #Supplier_relationships | #Governance_and_ Ecosystem |
## Control
Confidentiality or non-disclosure agreements reflecting the organization's needs for the protection of information should be identified, documented, regularly reviewed and signed by personnel and other relevant interested parties.
