if an error condition arises, the system should not indicate which part of the data is correct or incorrect);
- d) validating the log-on information only on completion of all input data;
- e) protecting against brute force log-on attempts on usernames and passwords [e.g. using completely automated public Turing test to tell computers and humans apart (CAPTCHA), requiring password reset  after  a  predefined  number  of  failed  attempts  or  blocking  the  user  after  a  maximum number of errors];
- f) logging unsuccessful and successful attempts;
- g) raising a security event if a potential attempted or successful breach of log-on controls is detected (e.g.  sending  an  alert  to  the  user  and  the  organization's  system  administrators  when  a  certain number of wrong password attempts has been reached);
- h) displaying  or  sending  the  following  information  on  a  separate  channel  on  completion  of  a successful log-on:
- 1) date and time of the previous successful log-on;
- 2) details of any unsuccessful log-on attempts since the last successful log-on;
- i) not displaying a password in clear text when it is being entered; in some cases, it can be required to de-activate this functionality in order to facilitate user log-on (e.g. for accessibility reasons or to avoid blocking users because of repeated errors);
- j) not  transmitting  passwords in clear text  over  a  network  to  avoid  being  captured  by  a  network "sniffer' program;
- k) terminating inactive sessions after a defined period of inactivity, especially in high risk locations such  as  public  or  external  areas  outside  the  organization's  security  management  or  on  user endpoint devices;
- l) restricting connection duration times to provide additional security for high-risk applications and reduce the window of opportunity for unauthorized access.
## Other information
Additional information on entity authentication assurance can be found is ISO/IEC 29115.
##  Capacity management
| Control type           | Information security properties   | Cybersecurity concepts     | Operational capabilities   | Security domains                         |
|------------------------|-----------------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|------------------------------------------|
| #Preventive #Detective | #Integrity #Availability          | #Identify #Protect #Detect | #Continuity                | #Governance_and_ Ecosystem #Protec- tion |
## Control
The use of resources should be monitored and adjusted in line with current and expected capacity requirements.
## Purpose
To  ensure  the  required  capacity  of  information  processing  facilities,  human  resources,  offices  and other facilities.
## Guidance
Capacity  requirements  for  information  processing  facilities,  human  resources,  offices  and  other facilities  should  be  identified,  taking  into  account  the  business  criticality  of  the  concerned  systems and processes.
System  tuning  and  monitoring  should  be  applied  to  ensure  and,  where  necessary,  improve  the availability and efficiency of systems.
The organization should perform stress-tests of systems and services to confirm that sufficient system capacity is available to meet peak performance requirements.
Detective controls should be put in place to indicate problems in due time.
Projections  of  future  capacity  requirements  should  take  account  of  new  business  and  system requirements  and  current  and  projected trends in the organization's information processing capabilities.
Particular attention should be paid to any resources with long procurement lead times or high costs. Therefore, managers, service or product owners should monitor the utilization of key system resources.
Managers  should  use  capacity  information  to  identify  and  avoid  potential  resource  limitations  and dependency  on  key  personnel  which  can  present  a  threat  to  system  security  or  services  and  plan appropriate action.
Providing  sufficient  capacity  can  be  achieved  by  increasing  capacity  or  by  reducing  demand.  The following should be considered to increase capacity:
- a) hiring new personnel;
- b) obtaining new facilities or space;
- c) acquiring more powerful processing systems, memory and storage;
- d) making use of cloud computing, which has inherent characteristics that directly address issues of capacity. Cloud computing has elasticity and scalability which enable on-demand rapid expansion and reduction in resources available to particular applications and services.
The following should be considered to reduce demand on the organization's resources:
- a) deletion of obsolete data (disk space);
- b) disposal of hardcopy records that have met their retention period (free up shelving space);
- c) decommissioning of applications, systems, databases or environments;
- d) optimizing batch processes and schedules;
- e) optimizing application code or database queries;
- f) denying or  restricting  bandwidth  for  resource-consuming  services  if  these  are  not  critical  (e.g. video streaming).
A documented capacity management plan should be considered for mission critical systems.
## Other information
For more detail on the elasticity and scalability of cloud computing, see ISO/IEC TS 23167.
##  Protection against malware
| Control type                       | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities                                | Security domains     |
|------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|----------------------|
| #Preventive #Detective #Corrective | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect #Detect         | #System_and_network_ security #Information_protec- tion | #Protection #Defence |
## Control
Protection against malware should be implemented and supported by appropriate user awareness.
## Purpose
To ensure information and other associated assets are protected against malware.
## Guidance
Protection against malware should be based on malware detection and repair software, information security  awareness,  appropriate  system  access  and  change  management  controls.  Use  of  malware detection  and  repair  software  alone  is  not  usually  adequate.  The  following  guidance  should be considered:
- a) implementing  rules  and  controls  that  prevent  or  detect  the  use  of  unauthorized  software  [e.g. application allowlisting (i.e. using a list providing allowed applications)] (see  and  );
- b) implementing controls that prevent or detect the use of known or suspected malicious websites (e.g. blocklisting);
- c) reducing  vulnerabilities  that  can  be  exploited  by  malware  [e.g.  through  technical  vulnerability management (see  and  )];
- d) conducting regular automated validation of the software and data content of systems, especially for systems supporting critical business processes; investigating the presence of any unapproved files or unauthorized amendments;
- e) establishing protective measures against risks associated with obtaining files and software either from or via external networks or on any other medium;
- f) installing and regularly updating malware detection and repair software to scan computers and electronic storage media. Carrying out regular scans that include:
- 1) scanning  any  data  received  over  networks  or  via  any  form  of  electronic  storage  media,  for malware before use;
- 2) scanning email and instant messaging attachments and downloads for malware before use. Carrying out this scan at different places (e.g. at email servers, desktop computers) and when entering the network of the organization;
- 3) scanning webpages for malware when accessed;
- g) determining the placement and configuration of malware detection and repair tools based on risk assessment outcomes and considering:
- 1) defence in depth principles where they would be most effective. For example, this can lead to malware detection in a network gateway (in various application protocols such as email, file transfer and web) as well as user endpoint devices and servers;
- 2) the evasive techniques of attackers (e.g. the use of encrypted files) to deliver malware or the use of encryption protocols to transmit malware;
- h) taking care to protect against the introduction of malware during maintenance and emergency procedures, which can bypass normal controls against malware;
- i) implementing a process to authorize temporarily or permanently disable some or all measures against malware, including exception approval authorities, documented justification and review  date.  