## Monitoring co nfigurations
Configurations  should  be  monitored  with  a  comprehensive  set  of  system  management  tools  (e.g. maintenance utilities, remote support, enterprise management tools, backup and restore software) and should be reviewed on a regular basis to verify configuration settings, evaluate password strengths and  assess  activities  performed.  Actual  configurations  can  be  compared  with  the  defined  target templates. Any deviations should be addressed, either by automatic enforcement of the defined target configuration or by manual analysis of the deviation followed by corrective actions.
## Other information
Documentation  for  systems  often records details about the configuration of  both  hardware and software.
System hardening is a typical part of configuration management.
Configuration management can be integrated with asset management processes and associated tooling.
Automation is usually more effective to manage security configuration (e.g. using infrastructure as code).
Configuration  templates  and  targets  can  be  confidential  information  and  should  be  protected  from unauthorized access accordingly.
##  Information deletion
| Control type   | Information security properties   | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities                          | Security domains   |
|----------------|-----------------------------------|--------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|--------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality                  | #Protect                 | #Information_pro- tection #Legal_and_compli- ance | #Protection        |
## Control
Information stored in information systems, devices or in any other storage media should be deleted when no longer required.
## Purpose
To  prevent  unnecessary  exposure  of  sensitive  information  and  to  comply  with  legal,  statutory, regulatory and contractual requirements for information deletion.
