The  ability  of  the  network  service  provider  to  manage  agreed  services  in  a  secure  way  should  be determined and regularly monitored. The right to audit should be agreed between the organization and the provider. The organization should also consider third-party attestations provided by service providers to demonstrate they maintain appropriate security measures.
Rules on the use of networks and network services should be formulated and implemented to cover:
- a) the networks and network services which are allowed to be accessed;
- b) authentication requirements for accessing various network services;
- c) authorization  procedures  for  determining  who  is  allowed  to  access  which  networks  and networked services;
- d) network  management  and  technological  controls  and  procedures  to  protect  access  to  network connections and network services;
- e) the means used to access networks and network services [e.g. use of virtual private network (VPN) or wireless network];
- f) time, location and other attributes of the user at the time of the access;
- g) monitoring of the use of network services.
The following security features of network services should be considered:
- a) technology  applied  for  security  of  network  services,  such  as  authentication,  encryption  and network connection controls;
- b) technical parameters required for secured connection with the network services in accordance with the security and network connection rules;
- c) caching (e.g. in a content delivery network) and its parameters that allow users to choose the use of caching in accordance with performance, availability and confidentiality requirements;
- d) procedures for the network service usage to restrict access to network services or applications, where necessary.
## Other information
Network services include the provision of connections, private network services and managed network security solutions such as firewalls and intrusion detection systems. These services can range from simple unmanaged bandwidth to complex value-added offerings.
More guidance on a framework for access management is given in ISO/IEC 29146.
##  Segregation of networks
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities       | Security domains   |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #System_and_net- work_security | #Protection        |
## Control
Groups  of  information  services,  users  and  information  systems  should  be  segregated  in  the organization's networks.
## Purpose
To split the network in security boundaries and to control traffic between them based on business needs.
## Guidance
The  organization  should  consider  managing  the  security  of  large  networks  by  dividing  them  into separate network domains and separating them from the public network (i.e. internet). The domains can be chosen based on levels of trust, criticality and sensitivity (e.g. public access domain, desktop domain, server domain, low- and high-risk systems), along organizational units (e.g. human resources, finance,  marketing)  or  some  combination  (e.g.  server  domain  connecting  to  multiple  organizational units).  The segregation can be done using either physically different networks or by using different logical networks.
The perimeter of each domain should be well-defined. If access between network domains is allowed, it should be controlled at the perimeter using a gateway (e.g. firewall, filtering router). The criteria for segregation of networks into domains, and the access allowed through the gateways, should be based on an assessment of the security requirements of each domain. The assessment should be in accordance with the topic-specific policy on access control (see  ), access requirements, value and classification of information processed and take account of the relative cost and performance impact of incorporating suitable gateway technology.
Wireless  networks  require  special  treatment  due  to  the  poorly-defined  network  perimeter.  Radio coverage  adjustment  should  be  considered  for  segregation  of  wireless  networks.  For  sensitive environments,  consideration  should  be  made  to  treat  all  wireless  access  as  external  connections and to segregate this access from internal networks until the access has passed through a gateway in accordance with network controls (see ) before granting access to internal systems. Wireless access  network  for  guests  should  be  segregated  from  those  for  personnel  if  personnel  only  use controlled user endpoint devices compliant to the organization's topic-specific policies. WiFi for guests should have at least the same restrictions as WiFi for personnel, in order to discourage the use of guest WiFi by personnel.
## Other information
Networks often extend beyond organizational boundaries, as business partnerships are formed that require  the  interconnection  or  sharing  of  information  processing  and  networking  facilities.  Such extensions  can  increase  the  risk  of  unauthorized  access  to  the  organization's  information  systems that  use  the  network,  some  of  which  require  protection  from  other  network  users  because  of  their sensitivity or criticality.
## 	Web	filtering
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities       | Security domains   |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #System_and_net- work_security | #Protection        |
## Control
Access to external websites should be managed to reduce exposure to malicious content.
## Purpose
To  protect  systems  from  being  compromised  by  malware  and  to  prevent  access  to  unauthorized web resources.
## Guidance
The  organization  should  reduce  the  risks  of  its  personnel  accessing  websites  that  contain  illegal information or are known to contain viruses or phishing material. A technique for achieving this works by blocking the IP address or domain of the website(s) concerned. Some browsers and anti-malware technologies do this automatically or can be configured to do so.
The organization should identify the types of websites to which personnel should or should not have access. The organization should consider blocking access to the following types of websites:
- a) websites that have an information upload function unless permitted for valid business reasons;
- b) known or suspected malicious websites (e.g. those distributing malware or phishing contents);
- c) command and control servers;
- d) malicious website acquired from threat intelligence (see  );
- e) websites sharing illegal content.
Prior to deploying this control, the organization should establish rules for safe and appropriate use of online resources, including any restriction to undesirable or inappropriate websites and web-based applications. The rules should be kept up-to-date.
Training should be given to personnel on the secure and appropriate use of online resources including access to the web. The training should include the organization's rules, contact point for raising security concerns,  and  exception  process  when  restricted  web  resources  need  to  be  accessed  for  legitimate business reasons. 