See  the  ISO/IEC  19770  series  for  details  about  IT asset management.
Data can be acquired from outside sources. It is generally the case that such data is obtained under the terms of a data sharing agreement or similar legal instrument. Such data sharing agreements should make it clear what processing is permitted for the acquired data. It is also advisable that the provenance of the data is clearly stated. See ISO/IEC 23751 for details about data sharing agreements.
Legal,  statutory,  regulatory  and  contractual  requirements  can  place  restrictions  on  the  copying of  proprietary  material.  In  particular,  they  can  require  that  only  material  that  is  developed  by  the organization or that is licensed or provided by the developer to the organization, can be used. Copyright infringement can lead to legal action, which can involve fines and criminal proceedings.
Aside from the organization needing to comply with its obligations towards third party intellectual property  rights,  the  risks  of  personnel  and  third  parties  failing  to  uphold  the  organization's  own intellectual property rights should also be managed.
##  Protection of records
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities                                          | Security do- mains   |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Identify #Protect       | #Legal_and_compliance #Asset_management #Information_protec- tion | #Defence             |
## Control
Records should be protected from loss, destruction, falsification, unauthorized access and unauthorized release.
## Purpose
To  ensure  compliance  with  legal,  statutory,  regulatory  and  contractual  requirements,  as  well  as community or societal expectations related to the protection and availability of records.
## Guidance
The organization should take the following steps to protect the authenticity, reliability, integrity and usability of records, as their business context and requirements for their management change over time:
- a) issue guidelines on the storage, handling chain of custody and disposal of records, which includes prevention of manipulation of records. These guidelines should be aligned with the organization's topic-specific policy on records management and other records requirements;
- b) draw  up  a  retention  schedule  defining  records  and  the  period  of  time  for  which  they  should be retained.
The  system  of  storage  and  handling  should  ensure  identification  of  records  and  of  their  retention period taking into consideration national or regional legislation or regulations, as well as community or
societal expectations, if applicable. This system should permit appropriate destruction of records after that period if they are not needed by the organization.
When  deciding  on  protection  of  specific  organizational  records,  their  corresponding  information security  classification,  based  on  the  organization's  classification  scheme,  should  be  considered. Records should be categorized into record types (e.g. accounting records, business transaction records, personnel records, legal records), each with details of retention periods and type of allowable storage media which can be physical or electronic.
Data storage systems should be chosen such that required records can be retrieved in an acceptable time frame and format, depending on the requirements to be fulfilled.
Where electronic storage media are chosen, procedures to ensure the ability to access records (both storage  media  and  format  readability)  throughout  the  retention  period  should  be  established  to safeguard against loss due to future technology change. Any related cryptographic keys and programs associated with encrypted archives or digital signatures, should also be retained to enable decryption of the records for the length of time the records are retained (see ).
Storage  and  handling  procedures  should  be  implemented  in  accordance  with  recommendations provided  by  manufacturers  of  storage  media.  Consideration  should  be  given  to  the  possibility  of deterioration of media used for storage of records.
## Other information
Records document individual events or transactions or can form aggregations that have been designed to document work processes, activities or functions. They are both evidence of business activity and information assets. Any set of information, regardless of its structure or form, can be managed as a record. This includes information in the form of a document, a collection of data or other types of digital or analogue information which are created, captured and managed in the course of business.
In  the  management  of  records,  metadata  is  data  describing  the  context,  content  and  structure  of records, as well as their management over time. Metadata is an essential component of any record.
It can be necessary to retain some records securely to meet legal, statutory, regulatory or contractual requirements, as well as to support essential business activities. National law or regulation can set the time period and data content for information retention. Further information about records management can be found in ISO 15489.
##  Privacy and protection of PII
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities                      | Security do- mains   |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|----------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Identify #Protect       | #Information_protection #Legal_and_compliance | #Protection          |
## Control
The organization should identify and meet the requirements regarding the preservation of privacy and protection of PII according to applicable laws and regulations and contractual requirements.
## Purpose
To  ensure  compliance  with  legal,  statutory,  regulatory  and  contractual  requirements  related  to  the information security aspects of the protection of PII.
## Guidance
The organization should establish and communicate a topic-specific policy on privacy and protection of PII to all relevant interested parties.
The  organization  should  develop  and  implement  procedures  for  the  preservation  of  privacy  and protection of PII. These procedures should be communicated to all relevant interested parties involved in the processing of personally identifiable information.
Compliance  with  these  procedures  and  all  relevant  legislation  and  regulations  concerning  the preservation of privacy and protection of PII requires appropriate roles, responsibilities and controls. Often this is best achieved by the appointment of a person responsible, such as a privacy officer, who should provide guidance to personnel, service providers and other interested parties on their individual responsibilities and the specific procedures that should be followed.
Responsibility for handling PII should be dealt with taking into consideration relevant legislation and regulations.
Appropriate technical and organizational measures to protect PII should be implemented.
## Other information
A  number  of  countries  have  introduced  legislation  placing  controls  on  the  collection,  processing, transmission and deletion of PII. Depending on the respective national legislation, such controls can impose duties on those collecting, processing and disseminating PII and can also restrict the authority to transfer PII to other countries.
ISO/IEC 29100 provides a high-level framework for the protection of PII within ICT systems. Further information  on  privacy  information  management  systems  can  be  found  in  ISO/IEC  27701.  Specific information regarding privacy information management for public clouds acting as PII processors can be found in ISO/IEC 27018.
ISO/IEC 29134 provides guidelines for privacy impact assessment (PIA) and gives an example of the structure and content of a PIA report. Compared with ISO/IEC 27005, this is focused on PII processing and relevant to those organizations that process PII. This can help identify privacy risks and possible mitigations to reduce these risks to acceptable levels.
##  Independent review of information security
| Control type              | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities          | Security domains           |
|---------------------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|-----------------------------------|----------------------------|
| #Preventive #Cor- rective | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Identify #Protect       | #Information_secu- rity_assurance | #Governance_and_ Ecosystem |
## Control
The organization's approach to managing information security and its implementation including people, processes and technologies should be reviewed independently at planned intervals, or when significant changes occur.
## Purpose
To  ensure  the  continuing  suitability,  adequacy  and  effectiveness  of  the  organization's  approach  to managing information security.
## Guidance
The organization should have processes to conduct independent reviews.
Management  should  plan  and  initiate  periodic  independent  reviews.  The  reviews  should  include assessing  opportunities  for  improvement  and  the  need  for  changes  to  the  approach  to  information security, including the information security policy, topic-specific policies and other controls.
Such  reviews  should  be  carried  out  by  individuals  independent  of  the  area  under  review  (e.g.  the internal audit function, an independent manager or an external party organization specializing in such
reviews). Individuals carrying out these reviews should have the appropriate competence. The person conducting the reviews should not be in the line of authority to ensure they have the independence to make an assessment.
The  results  of  the  independent  reviews  should  be  reported  to  the  management  who  initiated  the reviews and, if appropriate, to top management. These records should be maintained.
If the independent reviews identify that the organization's approach and implementation to managing information security is inadequate [e.g. documented objectives and requirements are not met or are not compliant with the direction for information security stated in the information security policy and topic-specific policies (see  )], management should initiate corrective actions.
In  addition  to  the  periodic  independent  reviews,  the  organization  should  consider  conducting independent reviews when:
- a) laws and regulations which affect the organization change;
- b) significant incidents occur;
- c) the organization starts a new business or changes a current business;
- d) the  organization  starts  to  use  a  new  product  or  service,  or  changes  the  use  of  a  current product or service;
- e) the organization changes the information security controls and procedures significantly.
## Other information
ISO/IEC 27007 and ISO/IEC TS 27008 provide guidance for carrying out independent reviews.
##  Compliance with policies, rules and standards for information security
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabil - ities                               | Security domains           |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Identify #Protect       | #Legal_and_compli- ance #Information_securi- ty_assurance | #Governance_and_ Ecosystem |
## Control
Compliance  with  the  organization's  information  security  policy,  topic-specific  policies,  rules  and standards should be regularly reviewed.
## Purpose
To ensure that information security is implemented and operated in accordance with the organization's information security policy, topic-specific policies, rules and standards.
## Guidance
Managers,  service,  product  or  information  owners  should  identify  how  to  review  that  information security  requirements  defined  in  the  information  security  policy,  topic-specific  policies,  rules, standards  and  other  applicable  regulations  are  met.  Automatic  measurement  and  reporting  tools should be considered for efficient regular review.
If any non-compliance is found as a result of the review, managers should:
- a) identify the causes of the non-compliance;
- b) evaluate the need for corrective actions to achieve compliance;
- c) implement appropriate corrective actions;
- d) review corrective actions taken to verify its effectiveness and identify any deficiencies or weaknesses.
