## Other information
The ISO/IEC 27035 series provides further guidance on incident management.
##  Response to information security incidents
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities                 | Security domains   |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|------------------------------------------|--------------------|
| #Corrective    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Respond #Recover        | #Information_securi- ty_event_management | #Defence           |
## Control
Information security incidents should be responded to in accordance with the documented procedures.
## Purpose
To ensure efficient and effective response to information security incidents.
## Guidance
The  organization  should  establish  and  communicate  procedures  on  information  security  incident response to all relevant interested parties.
Information  security  incidents  should  be  responded  to  by  a  designated  team  with  the  required competency (see ).
The response should include the following:
- a) containing, if the consequences of the incident can spread, the systems affected by the incident;
- b) collecting evidence (see  ) as soon as possible after the occurrence;
- c) escalation,  as  required  including  crisis  management  activities  and  possibly  invoking  business continuity plans (see  and  );
- d) ensuring that all involved response activities are properly logged for later analysis;
- e) communicating the existence of the information security incident or any relevant details thereof to all relevant internal and external interested parties following the need-to-know principle;
- f) coordinating with internal and external parties such as authorities, external interest groups and forums, suppliers and clients to improve response effectiveness and help to minimize consequences for other organizations;
- g) once the incident has been successfully addressed, formally closing and recording it;
- h) conducting information security forensic analysis, as required (see  );
- i) performing post-incident analysis to identify root cause. Ensure it is documented and communicated according to defined procedures (see  );
- j) identifying  and  managing  information  security  vulnerabilities  and  weaknesses  including  those related to controls which have caused, contributed to or failed to prevent the incident.
## Other information
The ISO/IEC 27035 series provides further guidance on incident management.
##  Learning from information security incidents
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities                   | Security domains   |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------------------------|--------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Identify #Protect       | #Information_secu- rity_event_manage- ment | #Defence           |
## Control
Knowledge gained from information security incidents should be used to strengthen and improve the information security controls.
## Purpose
To reduce the likelihood or consequences of future incidents.
## Guidance
The organization should establish procedures to quantify and monitor the types, volumes and costs of information security incidents.
The information gained from the evaluation of information security incidents should be used to:
- a) enhance the incident management plan including incident scenarios and procedures (see  );
- b) identify recurring or serious incidents and their causes to update the organization's information security risk assessment and determine and implement necessary additional controls to reduce the  likelihood  or  consequences  of  future  similar  incidents.  Mechanisms  to  enable  that  include collecting, quantifying and monitoring information about incident types, volumes and costs;
- c) enhance user awareness and training (see ) by providing examples of what can happen, how to respond to such incidents and how to avoid them in the future.
## Other information
The ISO/IEC 27035 series provides further guidance.
##  Collection of evidence
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities                   | Security domains   |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------------------------|--------------------|
| #Corrective    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Detect #Respond         | #Information_secu- rity_event_manage- ment | #Defence           |
## Control
The  organization  should  establish  and  implement  procedures  for  the  identification,  collection, acquisition and preservation of evidence related to information security events.
## Purpose
To ensure a consistent and effective management of evidence related to information security incidents for the purposes of disciplinary and legal actions.
## Guidance
Internal  procedures  should  be  developed  and  followed  when  dealing  with  evidence  related  to information security events for the purposes of disciplinary and legal actions. The requirements of different  jurisdictions  should  be  considered  to  maximize  chances  of  admission  across  the  relevant jurisdictions.
In  general,  these  procedures  for  the  management  of  evidence  should  provide  instructions  for  the identification, collection, acquisition and preservation of evidence in accordance with different types of storage media, devices and status of devices (i.e. powered on or off). Evidence typically needs to be collected in a manner that is admissible in the appropriate national courts of law or another disciplinary forum. It should be possible to show that:
- a) records are complete and have not been tampered with in any way;
- b) copies of electronic evidence are probably identical to the originals;
- c) any information system from which evidence has been gathered was operating correctly at the time the evidence was recorded.
Where available, certification or other relevant means of qualification of personnel and tools should be sought, so as to strengthen the value of the preserved evidence.
Digital evidence can transcend organizational or jurisdictional boundaries. In such cases, it should be ensured that the organization is entitled to collect the required information as digital evidence.
## Other information
When  an  information  security  event  is  first  detected,  it  is  not  always  obvious  whether  or  not  the event  will  result  in  court  action.  Therefore,  the  danger  exists  that  necessary  evidence  is  destroyed intentionally  or  accidentally  before  the  seriousness  of  the  incident  is  realized.  It  is  advisable  to involve legal advice or law enforcement early in any contemplated legal action and take advice on the evidence required.
ISO/IEC  27037  provides  definitions  and  guidelines  for  identification,  collection,  acquisition  and preservation of digital evidence.
The ISO/IEC 27050 series deals with electronic discovery, which involves the processing of electronically stored information as evidence.
##  Information security during disruption
| Control type              | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities   | Security domains        |
|---------------------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|-------------------------|
| #Preventive #Cor- rective | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect #Respond        | #Continuity                | #Protection #Resilience |
## Control
The  organization  should  plan how  to  maintain  information  security  at an appropriate  level during disruption.
## Purpose
To protect information and other associated assets during disruption.
## Guidance
The  organization  should  determine  its  requirements  for  adapting  information  security  controls during disruption. Information security requirements should be included in the business continuity management processes.
Plans should be developed, implemented, tested, reviewed and evaluated to maintain or restore the security  of  information  of  critical  business  processes  following  interruption  or  failure.  Security  of information should be restored at the required level and in the required time frames.
The organization should implement and maintain:
- a) information security controls, supporting systems and tools within business continuity and ICT continuity plans;
- b) processes to maintain existing information security controls during disruption;
- c) compensating controls for information security controls that cannot be maintained during disruption.
## Other information
In  the  context  of  business  continuity  and  ICT  continuity  planning,  it  can  be  necessary  to  adapt the  information  security  requirements  depending  on  the  type  of  disruption,  compared  to  normal operational  conditions.  As  part  of  the  business  impact  analysis  and  risk  assessment  performed within business continuity management, the consequences of loss of confidentiality and integrity of information should be considered and prioritized in addition to the need for maintaining availability.
Information on business continuity management systems can be found in ISO 22301 and ISO 22313. Further guidance on business impact analysis (BIA) can be found in ISO/TS 22317.
## 	ICT	readiness	for	business	continuity
| Control type   | Information security properties   | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities   | Security domains   |
|----------------|-----------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|--------------------|
| #Corrective    | #Availability                     | #Respond                 | #Continuity                | #Resilience        |
## Control
ICT readiness should be planned, implemented, maintained and tested based on business continuity objectives and ICT continuity requirements.
## Purpose
To ensure the availability of the organization's information and other associated assets during disruption.
## Guidance
ICT readiness for business continuity is an important component in business continuity management and information security management to ensure that the organization's objectives can continue to be met during disruption.
The ICT continuity requirements are the outcome of the business impact analysis (BIA). The BIA process should use impact types and criteria to assess the impacts over time resulting from the disruption of business activities  that  deliver  products  and  services.  The  magnitude  and  duration  of  the  resulting impact  should  be  used  to  identify  prioritized  activities  which  should  be  assigned  a  recovery  time objective (RTO). The BIA should then determine which resources are needed to support prioritized activities.  An  RTO  should  also  be  specified  for  these  resources.  A  subset  of  these  resources  should include ICT services.
The  BIA  involving  ICT  services  can  be  expanded  to  define  performance  and  capacity  requirements of  ICT  systems  and  recovery  point  objectives  (RPO)  of  information  required  to  support  activities during disruption.
Based on the outputs from the BIA and risk assessment involving ICT services, the organization should identify and select ICT continuity strategies that consider options for before, during and after disruption. The business continuity strategies can comprise one or more solutions. Based on the strategies, plans should be developed, implemented and tested to meet the required availability level of ICT services and in the required time frames following interruption to, or failure of, critical processes.
The organization should ensure that:
- a) an adequate organizational structure is in place to prepare for, mitigate and respond to a disruption supported by personnel with the necessary responsibility, authority and competence;
- b) ICT continuity plans, including response and recovery procedures detailing how the organization is planning to manage an ICT service disruption, are:
- 1) regularly evaluated through exercises and tests;
- 2) approved by management;
- c) ICT continuity plans include the following ICT continuity information:
- 1) performance and capacity specifications  to  meet  the  business  continuity  requirements  and objectives as specified in the BIA;
- 2) RTO of each prioritized ICT service and the procedures for restoring those components;
- 3) RPO of the prioritized ICT resources defined as information and the procedures for restoring the information.
## Other information
Managing ICT continuity forms a key part of business continuity requirements concerning availability to be able to:
- a) respond and recover from disruption to ICT services regardless of the cause;
- b) ensure continuity of prioritized activities are supported by the required ICT services;
- c) respond before a disruption to ICT services occurs, and upon detection of at least one incident that can result in a disruption to ICT services.
