Organizations of all types and sizes (including public and private sector, commercial and non-profit) create, collect, process, store, transmit and dispose of information in many forms, including electronic, physical and verbal (e.g. conversations and presentations).
The value of information goes beyond written words, numbers and images: knowledge, concepts, ideas and brands are examples of intangible forms of information. In an interconnected world, information and other associated assets deserve or require protection against various risk sources, whether natural, accidental or deliberate.
Information security is achieved by implementing a suitable set of controls, including policies, rules, processes, procedures, organizational structures and software and hardware functions. To meet its specific security and business objectives, the organization should define, implement, monitor, review and improve these controls where necessary. An ISMS such as that specified in ISO/IEC 27001 takes a holistic, coordinated view of the organization's information security risks in order to determine and implement a comprehensive suite of information security controls within the overall framework of a coherent management system.
Many information systems, including their management and operations, have not been designed to be secure in terms of an ISMS as specified in ISO/IEC 27001 and this document. The level of security that can be achieved only through technological measures is limited and should be supported by appropriate management  activities  and  organizational  processes.  Identifying  which  controls  should  be  in  place requires careful planning and attention to detail while carrying out risk treatment.
A  successful  ISMS  requires  support  from  all  personnel  in  the  organization.  It  can  also  require participation  from  other  interested  parties,  such  as  shareholders  or  suppliers.  Advice  from  subject matter experts can also be needed.
A suitable, adequate and effective information security management system provides assurance to the organization's management and other interested parties that their information and other associated assets  are  kept  reasonably  secure  and  protected  against  threats  and  harm,  thereby  enabling  the organization to achieve the stated business objectives.
##    Information security requirements
It is essential that an organization determines its information security requirements. There are three main sources of information security requirements:
- a) the assessment of risks to the organization, taking into account the organization's overall business strategy  and  objectives.  This  can  be  facilitated  or  supported  through  an  information  securityspecific  risk  assessment.  This  should  result  in  the  determination  of  the  controls  necessary  to ensure that the residual risk to the organization meets its risk acceptance criteria;
- b) the  legal,  statutory,  regulatory  and  contractual  requirements  that  an  organization  and  its interested parties (trading partners, service providers, etc.) have to comply with and their sociocultural environment;
- c) the  set  of  principles,  objectives  and  business  requirements  for  all  the  steps  of  the  life  cycle  of information that an organization has developed to support its operations.
##    Controls
A control is defined as a measure that modifies or maintains risk. Some of the controls in this document are controls that modify risk, while others maintain risk. An information security policy, for example, can  only  maintain  risk,  whereas  compliance  with  the  information  security  policy  can  modify  risk. Moreover, some controls describe the same generic measure in different risk contexts. This document provides a generic mixture of organizational, people, physical and technological information security controls derived from internationally recognized best practices.
##    Determining controls
Determining controls is dependent on the organization's decisions following a risk assessment, with a  clearly  defined scope. Decisions related to identified risks should be based on the criteria for risk acceptance, risk treatment options and the risk management approach applied by the organization. The determination of controls should also take into consideration all relevant national and international legislation  and  regulations.  Control  determination  also  depends  on  the  manner  in  which  controls interact with one another to provide defence in depth.
The organization can design controls as required or identify them from any source. In specifying such controls,  the  organization  should  consider  the  resources  and  investment  needed  to  implement  and operate a control against the business value realized. See ISO/IEC TR 27016 for guidance on decisions regarding the investment in an ISMS and the economic consequences of these decisions in the context of competing requirements for resources.
There should be a balance between the resources deployed for implementing controls and the potential resulting  business  impact  from  security  incidents  in  the  absence  of  those  controls.  The  results  of  a risk  assessment should help guide and determine the appropriate management action, priorities for managing information security risks and for implementing controls determined necessary to protect against these risks.
Some of the controls in this document can be considered as guiding principles for information security management  and  as  being  applicable  for  most  organizations.  More  information  about  determining controls and other risk treatment options can be found in ISO/IEC 27005.
## 			Developing	organization-specific	guidelines
This  document  can  be  regarded  as  a  starting  point  for  developing  organization-specific  guidelines. Not all of the controls and guidance in this document can be applicable to all organizations. Additional controls and guidelines not included in this document can also be required to address the specific needs of the organization and the risks that have been identified. When documents are developed containing additional guidelines or controls, it can be useful to include cross-references to clauses in this document for future reference.
##    Life cycle considerations
Information has a life cycle, from creation to disposal. The value of, and risks to, information can vary throughout this life cycle (e.g. unauthorized disclosure or theft of a company's financial accounts is not significant after they have been published, but integrity remains critical) therefore, information security remains important to some extent at all stages.
Information systems and other assets relevant to information security have life cycles within which they are conceived, specified, designed, developed, tested, implemented, used, maintained and eventually retired from service and disposed of. Information security should be considered at every stage. New system  development  projects  and  changes  to  existing  systems  provide  opportunities  to  improve security controls while taking into account the organization's risks and lessons learned from incidents.
##    Related International Standards
While  this  document  offers  guidance  on  a  broad  range  of  information  security  controls  that  are commonly  applied  in  many  different  organizations,  other  documents  in  the  ISO/IEC  27000  family provide complementary advice or requirements on other aspects of the overall process of managing information security.
Refer  to  ISO/IEC  27000  for  a  general  introduction  to  both  ISMS  and  the  family  of  documents.  ISO/ IEC 27000 provides a glossary, defining most of the terms used throughout the ISO/IEC 27000 family of documents, and describes the scope and objectives for each member of the family.
There  are  sector-specific  standards  that  have  additional  controls  which  aim  at  addressing  specific areas  (e.g.  ISO/IEC  27017  for  cloud  services,  ISO/IEC  27701  for  privacy,  ISO/IEC  27019  for  energy, ISO/IEC 27011 for telecommunications organizations and ISO 27799 for health). Such standards are included in the Bibliography and some of them are referenced in the guidance and other information sections in Clauses 5-8.
## Information	security,	cybersecurity	and	privacy	protection - Information security controls
## 1 Scope
This document provides a reference set of generic information security controls including implementation guidance. This document is designed to be used by organizations:
- a) within the context of an information security management system (ISMS) based on ISO/IEC 27001;
- b) for implementing information security controls based on internationally recognized best practices;
- c) for developing organization-specific information security management guidelines.
## 2 Normative references
There are no normative references in this document.
