Roles should be carefully defined and provisioned to minimize access problems if a role is removed or reassigned.
## Other information
No other information.
##  Management	responsibilities
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities   | Security domains            |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|-----------------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Identify                | #Governance                | #Governance_and_Ecosys- tem |
## Control
Management  should  require  all  personnel  to  apply  information  security  in  accordance  with  the established information security policy, topic-specific policies and procedures of the organization.
## Purpose
To ensure management understand their role in information security and undertake actions aiming to ensure all personnel are aware of and fulfil their information security responsibilities.
## Guidance
Management  should  demonstrate  support  of  the  information  security  policy,  topic-specific  policies, procedures and information security controls.
Management responsibilities should include ensuring that personnel:
- a) are properly briefed on their information security roles and responsibilities prior to being granted access to the organization's information and other associated assets;
- b) are provided with guidelines which state the information security expectations of their role within the organization;
- c) are mandated to fulfil the information security policy and topic-specific policies of the organization;
- d) achieve  a  level  of  awareness  of  information  security  relevant  to  their  roles  and  responsibilities within the organization (see  );
- e) compliance with the terms and conditions of employment, contract or agreement, including the organization's information security policy and appropriate methods of working;
- f) continue to have the appropriate information security skills and qualifications through ongoing professional education;
- g) where practicable, are provided with a confidential channel for reporting violations of information security policy, topic-specific policies or procedures for information security ('whistleblowing'). This  can  allow  for  anonymous  reporting,  or  have  provisions  to  ensure  that  knowledge  of  the identity of the reporter is known only to those who need to deal with such reports;
- h) are provided with adequate resources and project planning time for implementing the organization's security-related processes and controls.
## Other information
No other information.
##  Contact with authorities
| Control type            | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts               | Operational capabilities   | Security domains     |
|-------------------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------|
| #Preventive #Corrective | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Identify #Protect #Respond #Recover | #Governance                | #Defence #Resilience |
## Control
The organization should establish and maintain contact with relevant authorities.
## Purpose
To ensure appropriate flow of information takes place with respect to information security between the organization and relevant legal, regulatory and supervisory authorities.
## Guidance
The  organization  should  specify  when  and  by  whom  authorities  (e.g.  law  enforcement,  regulatory bodies, supervisory authorities) should be contacted and how identified information security incidents should be reported in a timely manner.
Contacts with authorities should also be used to facilitate the understanding about the current and upcoming expectations of these authorities (e.g. applicable information security regulations).
## Other information
Organizations under attack can request authorities to take action against the attack source.
Maintaining such contacts can be a requirement to support information security incident management (see  to ) or the contingency planning and business continuity processes (see  and ). Contacts with regulatory bodies are also useful to anticipate and prepare for upcoming changes in relevant  laws  or  regulations  that  affect  the  organization.  Contacts  with  other  authorities  include utilities,  emergency  services,  electricity  suppliers  and  health  and  safety  [e.g.  