- 3. The core data elements to be provided to the UDI database, referred to in Part B of Annex VI, shall be accessible to the public free of charge.
- 4. The  technical  design  of  the  UDI  database  shall  ensure  maximum  accessibility  to  information  stored  therein, including  multi-user  access  and  automatic  uploads  and  downloads  of  that  information.  The  Commission  shall  provide for  technical and administrative support to manufacturers and other users of the UDI database. ## Article 29
## Registration of devices
- 1. Before  placing  a  device,  other  than  a  custom-made  device,  on  the  market,  the  manufacturer  shall,  in  accordance with the rules of  the issuing entity referred to in Article 27(2), assign a Basic UDI-DI as defined in Part C of Annex VI to the  device  and  shall  provide  it  to  the  UDI  database  together  with  the  other  core  data  elements  referred  to  in  Part  B  of Annex VI related to that device.
- 2. Before  placing  on  the  market  a  system  or  procedure  pack  pursuant  to  Article  22(1)  and  (3),  that  is  not  a  custommade  device,  the  natural  or  legal  person  responsible  shall  assign  to  the  system  or  procedure  pack,  in  compliance  with the  rules  of  the  issuing  entity,  a  Basic  UDI-DI  and  shall  provide  it  to  the  UDI  database  together  with  the  other  core  data elements referred to in Part B of Annex VI related to that system or procedure pack.
- 3. For  devices  that  are  the  subject  of  a  conformity  assessment  as  referred  to  in  Article  52(3)  and  in  the  second  and third subparagraphs of Article 52(4), the assignment of a Basic UDI-DI referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be done before the manufacturer applies to a notified body for  that assessment.
For  the  devices  referred  to  in  the  first  subparagraph,  the  notified  body  shall  include  a  reference  to  the  Basic  UDI-DI  on the  certificate  issued  in  accordance  with  point  (a)  of  Section  4  of  Chapter  I  of  Annex  XII  and  confirm  in  Eudamed  that the  information  referred  to  in  Section    of  Part  A  of  Annex  VI  is  correct.  After  the  issuing  of  the  relevant  certificate and  before  placing  the  device  on  the  market,  the  manufacturer  shall  provide  the  Basic  UDI-DI  to  the  UDI  database together  with the other core data elements referred to in Part B of Annex VI related to that device.
- 4. Before placing a device on the market, other  than a custom-made device, the manufacturer shall enter or if, already provided,  verify  in  Eudamed  the  information  referred  to  in  Section  2  of  Part  A  of  Annex  VI,  with  the  exception  of Section  thereof, and shall thereafter keep the information updated.
## Article 30
## Electronic system for registration of economic operators
- 1. The  Commission,  after  consulting  the  MDCG,  shall  set  up  and  manage  an  electronic  system  to  create  the  single registration  number  referred  to  in  Article  31(2)  and  to  collate  and  process  information  that  is  necessary  and  propor­ tionate  to  identify  the  manufacturer  and,  where  applicable,  the  authorised  representative  and  the  importer.  The  details regarding the information to be provided to that electronic system by the economic operators are laid down in Section 1 of Part A of Annex VI.
- 2. Member States may maintain or introduce national provisions on registration of distributors of devices which have been made available on their  territory.
- 3. Within two weeks of placing a device, other  than a custom-made device, on the market, importers shall verify that the  manufacturer  or  authorised  representative  has  provided  to  the  electronic  system  the  information  referred  to  in paragraph 1.
Where  applicable,  importers  shall  inform  the  relevant  authorised  representative  or  manufacturer  if  the  information referred to in paragraph 1 is not included or is incorrect. Importers shall add their details to the relevant entry/entries.
## Article 31
## Registration of manufacturers, authorised representatives and importers
- 1. Before placing a device, other than a custom-made device, on the market, manufacturers, authorised representatives and  importers  shall,  in  order  to  register,  submit  to  the  electronic  system  referred  to  in  Article  30  the  information referred  to  in  Section  1  of  Part  A  of  Annex  VI,  provided  that  they  have  not  already  registered  in  accordance  with  this Article.  In  cases  where  the  conformity  assessment  procedure  requires  the  involvement  of  a  notified  body  pursuant  to Article  52,  the  information  referred  to  in  Section  1  of  Part  A  of  Annex  VI  shall  be  provided  to  that  electronic  system before applying to the notified body.
- 2. After  having  verified  the  data  entered  pursuant  to  paragraph  1,  the  competent  authority  shall  obtain  a  single registration  number  ('SRN')  from  the  electronic  system  referred  to  in  Article  30  and  issue  it  to  the  manufacturer,  the authorised representative or the importer. - 3. The manufacturer shall use the SRN when applying to a notified body for conformity assessment and for accessing Eudamed in order to fulfil its obligations under Article 29.
- 4. Within one week of any change occurring in relation to the information referred to in paragraph 1 of  this Article, the economic operator shall update the data in the electronic system referred to in Article 30.
- 5. Not  later  than  one  year  after  submission  of  the  information  in  accordance  with  paragraph  1,  and  every  second year  thereafter,  the  economic  operator  shall  confirm  the  accuracy  of  the  data.  In  the  event  of  a  failure  to  do  so  within six  months of  those deadlines, any Member State may take appropriate corrective measures within its territory until that economic operator complies with that obligation.
