Such  documentation  shall  include  information  about  ownership  and  the  legal  or  natural persons exercising control over  the notified body.
- .   If  the  notified  body  is  a  legal  entity  that  is  part  of  a  larger  organisation,  the  activities  of  that  organisation  as  well as  its  organisational  structure  and  governance,  and  the  relationship  with  the  notified  body  shall  be  clearly documented.  In  such  cases,  the  requirements  of  Section    are  applicable  to  both  the  notified  body  and  the organisation to which it belongs.
- .   If  a  notified  body  wholly  or  partly  owns  legal  entities  established  in  a  Member  State  or  in  a  third  country  or  is owned  by  another  legal  entity,  the  activities  and  responsibilities  of  those  entities,  as  well  as  their  legal  and operational  relationships  with  the  notified  body,  shall  be  clearly  defined  and  documented.  Personnel  of  those entities  performing  conformity  assessment  activities  under  this  Regulation  shall  be  subject  to  the  applicable requirements of this Regulation.
- .   The organisational structure, allocation of responsibilities, reporting lines and operation of  the notified body shall be  such  that  they  ensure  that  there  is  confidence  in  the  performance  by  the  notified  body  and  in  the  results  of the conformity assessment activities it conducts.
- .   The  notified  body  shall  clearly  document  its  organisational  structure  and  the  functions,  responsibilities  and authority of  its  top-level  management  and  of other  personnel  who  may  have  an  influence  upon  the  performance by the notified body and upon the results of its conformity assessment activities.
- . The  notified  body  shall  identify  the  persons  in  top-level  management  that  have  overall  authority  and  responsi足 bility for each of  the following:
- -  the provision of adequate resources for conformity assessment activities;
- -  the development of procedures and policies for the operation of the notified body;
- -  the supervision of implementation of the procedures, policies and quality management systems of the notified body;
- -  the supervision of the notified body's finances;
- -  the activities and decisions taken by the notified body, including contractual agreements;
- -  the  delegation  of  authority  to  personnel  and/or  committees,  where  necessary,  for  the  performance  of  defined activities;
- - the  interaction  with  the  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  and  the  obligations  regarding  communi足 cations with other competent authorities, the Commission and other notified bodies.
- . Independence and impartiality
- .   The  notified  body  shall  be  a  third-party  body  that  is  independent  of  the  manufacturer  of  the  device  in  relation  to which  it  performs  conformity  assessment  activities.  The  notified  body  shall  also  be  independent  of  any  other economic operator having  an  interest  in  the  device  as  well  as  of  any competitors  of  the  manufacturer.  This  does not preclude the notified body from carrying out conformity assessment activities for competing manufacturers.
- .   The notified body  shall  be  organised  and  operated so as to  safeguard the independence,  objectivity  and impartiality  of  its  activities.  The  notified  body  shall  document  and  implement  a  structure  and  procedures  for safeguarding impartiality and for promoting and applying the principles of impartiality throughout its organisation,  personnel  and  assessment  activities.  Such  procedures  shall  provide  for  the  identification,  investi足 gation  and  resolution  of  any  case  in  which  a  conflict  of  interest  may  arise,  including  involvement  in  consultancy services  in  the  field  of  devices  prior  to  taking  up  employment  with  the  notified  body.  The  investigation,  outcome and its resolution shall be documented.
- .   The  notified  body,  its  top-level  management  and  the  personnel  responsible  for  carrying  out  the  conformity assessment tasks shall not:
- (a)   be  the  designer,  manufacturer,  supplier,  installer,  purchaser,  owner  or  maintainer of  devices  which they  assess, nor  the  authorised representative of any of  those parties. Such restriction shall not preclude the purchase and use  of  assessed  devices  that  are  necessary  for  the  operations  of  the  notified  body  and  the  conduct  of  the conformity assessment, or the use of such devices for personal purposes;
- (b)   be  involved  in  the  design,  manufacture  or  construction,  marketing,  installation  and  use,  or  maintenance  of the devices for  which they are designated, nor represent the parties engaged in those activities;
- (c)   engage  in  any  activity  that  may  conflict  with  their  independence  of  judgement  or  integrity  in  relation  to conformity assessment activities for which they are designated;
- (d)   offer  or  provide  any  service  which  may  jeopardise  the  confidence  in  their  independence,  impartiality  or objectivity. In particular, they  shall not  offer or provide  consultancy  services to the manufacturer,  its authorised representative, a supplier or a commercial  competitor  as regards the design, construction, marketing or maintenance of devices or processes under assessment, and
- (e)   be  linked  to  any  organisation  which  itself  provides  consultancy  services  as  referred  to  in  point  (d).  Such restriction  does  not  preclude general  training activities  that are  not  client  specific  and  that  relate  to regulation of devices or  to related standards.
- .   Involvement  in  consultancy  services  in  the  field  of  devices  prior  to  taking  up  employment  with  a  notified  body shall  be  fully  documented  at  the  time  of  employment  and  potential  conflicts  of  interest  shall  be  monitored  and resolved  in  accordance  with  this  Annex.  Personnel  who were  formerly employed  by a  specific  client,  or  provided consultancy  services  in  the  field  of  devices  to  that  specific  client  prior  to  taking  up  employment  with  a  notified body, shall not be assigned for conformity assessment activities for  that specific  client or companies belonging to the same group for a period of three years.
- .   The  impartiality  of  notified  bodies,  of  their  top-level  management  and  of  the  assessment  personnel  shall  be guaranteed.  The  level  of  the  remuneration  of  the  top-level  management  and  assessment  personnel  of  a  notified body  and  subcontractors,  involved  in  assessment  activities  shall  not  depend  on  the  results  of  the  assessments. Notified bodies shall make publicly available the declarations of interest of their  top-level management.
- .   If  a  notified  body  is  owned  by  a  public  entity or  institution,  independence  and  absence  of  any conflict  of  interest shall  be  ensured  and  documented  between,  on  the  one  hand,  the  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  and/or the competent authority and, on the other hand, the notified body.
- .   The  notified  body  shall  ensure  and  document  that  the  activities  of  its  subsidiaries  or  subcontractors,  or  of  any associated  body, including the activities of its owners  do  not  affect its  independence,  impartiality  or the objectivity of its conformity assessment activities.
- .   The  notified  body  shall  operate  in  accordance  with  a  set  of  consistent,  fair  and  reasonable  terms  and  conditions, taking into account the interests of small and medium-sized enterprises as defined in Recommen足 dation 2003/361/EC in relation to fees.
- .   The requirements laid down in this Section in no way preclude exchanges of technical information and regulatory guidance between a notified body and a manufacturer applying for conformity assessment.
## . Confidentiality
- .   The notified body shall have  documented procedures in place ensuring that its personnel, committees, subsidiaries, subcontractors, and any associated body or personnel of external bodies respect the confidentiality of the  information  which  comes  into  its  possession  during  the  performance  of  conformity  assessment  activities, except when disclosure is required by law.
- .   The  personnel  of  a  notified  body  shall  observe  professional  secrecy  in  carrying  out  their  tasks  under  this Regulation or any provision of national law giving effect to it, except in relation to the authorities responsible for notified  bodies,  competent  authorities  for  medical  devices  in  the  Member  States  or  the  Commission.  Proprietary rights  shall  be  protected.  The  notified  body  shall  have  documented  procedures  in  place  in  respect  of  the requirements of this Section.
- . Liability
- .   The  notified  body  shall  take  out  appropriate  liability  insurance  for  its  conformity  assessment  activities,  unless liability  is  assumed  by  the  Member  State  in  question  in  accordance  with  national  law  or  that  Member  State  is directly responsible for  the conformity assessment.
- .   The  scope  and  overall  financial  value  of  the  liability  insurance  shall  correspond  to the  level  and  geographic scope of  activities  of  the  notified  body  and  be  commensurate  with  the  risk  profile  of  the  devices  certified  by  the notified  body.  The  liability  insurance  shall  cover  cases  where  the  notified  body  may  be  obliged  to  withdraw, restrict or suspend certificates.
## . Financial requirements
- The notified  body  shall  have  at  its  disposal  the  financial  resources  required  to  conduct  its  conformity  assessment activities  within  its  scope  of  designation  and  related  business  operations.  It  shall  document  and  provide  evidence of  its  financial  capacity  and  its  long-term  economic  viability,  taking  into  account,  where  relevant,  any  specific circumstances during an initial start-up phase.
- . Participation in coordination activities
- . 