- 3. A distributor or  importer  that  carries  out  any of  the  activities  mentioned  in points  (a)  and  (b)  of  paragraph  2  shall indicate  on  the  device  or,  where  that  is  impracticable,  on  its  packaging  or  in  a  document  accompanying  the  device,  the activity  carried  out  together  with  its  name,  registered  trade  name  or  registered  trade  mark,  registered  place  of  business and the address at which it can be contacted, so that its location can be established.
Distributors  and  importers  shall  ensure  that  they  have  in  place  a  quality  management  system  that  includes  procedures which  ensure  that  the  translation  of  information  is  accurate  and  up-to-date,  and  that  the  activities  mentioned  in points (a) and (b) of paragraph 2 are performed by a means and under conditions that preserve the original condition of the  device  and  that  the  packaging  of  the  repackaged  device  is  not  defective,  of  poor  quality  or  untidy.  The  quality management  system  shall  cover, inter  alia ,  procedures  ensuring  that  the  distributor  or  importer  is  informed  of  any corrective  action  taken  by  the  manufacturer  in  relation  to  the  device  in  question  in  order  to  respond  to  safety  issues  or to bring it into conformity with this Regulation.
- 4. At  least  28  days  prior  to  making  the  relabelled  or  repackaged  device  available  on  the  market,  distributors  or importers  carrying out any  of the activities mentioned  in  points (a) and  (b) of paragraph  2  shall inform  the manufacturer  and  the  competent  authority  of  the  Member  State  in  which  they  plan  to  make  the  device  available  of  the intention  to  make  the  relabelled  or  repackaged  device  available  and,  upon  request,  shall  provide  the  manufacturer  and the competent authority with a sample or  mock-up of the relabelled or  repackaged device, including any translated label and  instructions  for  use.  Within  the  same  period  of  28  days,  the  distributor  or  importer  shall  submit  to  the  competent authority  a  certificate,  issued  by  a  notified  body  designated  for the  type  of  devices  that  are  subject  to  activities mentioned  in  points  (a)  and  (b)  of  paragraph  2,  attesting  that  the  quality  management  system  of  the  distributer  or importer complies with the requirements laid down in paragraph 3.
## Article 17
## Single-use devices and their reprocessing
- 1. Reprocessing  and  further  use  of  single-use  devices  may  only  take  place  where  permitted  by  national  law  and  only in accordance with this Article.
- 2. Any  natural  or  legal  person  who  reprocesses  a  single-use  device  to  make  it  suitable  for  further  use  within  the Union shall be considered to be the manufacturer of  the reprocessed device and shall assume the obligations incumbent on  manufacturers  laid  down  in  this  Regulation,  which  include  obligations  relating  to  the  traceability  of  the  reprocessed device  in  accordance  with  Chapter  III  of  this  Regulation.  The  reprocessor  of  the  device  shall  be  considered  to  be a producer for the purpose of Article 3(1) of Directive 85/374/EEC.
- 3. By way of derogation from paragraph 2, as regards single-use devices that are reprocessed and used within a health institution,  Member  States  may  decide  not  to  apply  all  of  the  rules  relating  to  manufacturers'  obligations  laid  down  in this Regulation provided that they ensure that:
- (a)   the safety  and performance  of the reprocessed device is equivalent to that of the original device and the requirements in points (a), (b), (d), (e), (f), (g) and (h) of Article 5(5) are complied with;
- (b)   the  reprocessing is performed in accordance with CS detailing the requirements concerning:
- -  risk  management,  including  the  analysis  of  the  construction  and  material,  related  properties  of  the  device (reverse  engineering)  and  procedures  to  detect  changes  in  the  design  of  the  original  device  as  well  as  of  its planned application after reprocessing,
- -  the validation of procedures for  the entire process, including cleaning steps,
- -  the product release and performance testing,
- -  the quality management system,
- -  the reporting of incidents involving devices that have been reprocessed, and
- -  the traceability of reprocessed devices.
Member  States  shall  encourage,  and  may  require,  health  institutions  to  provide  information  to  patients  on  the  use  of reprocessed  devices  within  the  health  institution  and,  where  appropriate,  any  other relevant  information  on  the reprocessed devices that patients are treated with. Member States shall notify the Commission and the other Member States of the national provisions introduced pursuant to this paragraph and the grounds for introducing them. The Commission shall keep the information publicly available.
- 4. Member  States  may  choose  to  apply  the  provisions  referred  to  in  paragraph  3  also  as  regards  single-use  devices that  are  reprocessed  by  an  external  reprocessor  at  the  request  of  a  health  institution,  provided  that  the  reprocessed device  in  its  entirety  is  returned  to  that  health  institution  and  the  external  reprocessor  complies  with  the  requirements referred to in points (a) and (b) of paragraph 3.
- 5. The  Commission  shall  adopt,  in  accordance  with  Article  9(1),  the  necessary  CS  referred  to  in  point  (b)  of paragraph  3  by  26  May  2020.  Those  CS  shall  be  consistent  with  the  latest  scientific  evidence  and  shall  address  the application  of  the  general  requirements  on  safety  and  performance  laid  down  in  in  this  Regulation.  In  the  event  that those CS are not adopted by 26 May 2020, reprocessing shall be performed in accordance with any relevant harmonised standards and national provisions that cover  the aspects outlined in point (b) of paragraph 3. Compliance with CS or, in the absence of CS, with any relevant harmonised standards and national provisions, shall be certified by a notified body.
- 6. Only  single-use  devices  that  have  been  placed  on  the  market  in  accordance  with  this  Regulation,  or  prior  to 26 May 2020 in accordance with Directive 93/42/EEC, may be reprocessed.
- 7. Only  reprocessing  of  single-use  devices  that  is  considered  safe  according  to  the  latest  scientific  evidence  may  be carried out.
- 8. The name and address of the legal or  natural person referred to in paragraph 2 and the other  relevant information referred  to  in  Section  23  of  Annex  I  shall  be  indicated  on  the  label  and,  where  applicable,  in  the  instructions  for  use  of the reprocessed device.
The name and address of the manufacturer of the original single-use device shall no longer appear on the label, but shall be mentioned in the instructions for use of the reprocessed device.
- 9. A Member State that permits reprocessing of single-use devices may maintain or introduce national provisions that are stricter  than those laid down in this Regulation and which restrict or prohibit, within its territory, the following:
- (a)   the  reprocessing  of  single-use  devices  and  the  transfer  of  single-use  devices  to  another  Member  State  or  to  a  third country with a view to their reprocessing;
- (b)   the  making available or further  use of reprocessed single-use devices.
Member States shall notify the Commission and the other Member States of  those national provisions. The Commission shall make such information publicly available.
- 10. The  Commission  shall  by  27  May  2024  draw  up  a  report  on  the  operation  of  this  Article  and  submit  it  to  the European  Parliament  and  to  the  Council.  On  the  basis  of  that  report,  the  Commission  shall,  if  appropriate,  make proposals for amendments to this Regulation.
## Article 18
## Implant card and information to be supplied to the patient with an implanted device
- 1. The manufacturer of an implantable device shall provide together with the device the following:
- (a)   information allowing the identification of  the device, including the device name, serial number, lot number, the UDI, the device model, as well as the name, address and the website of the manufacturer;
- (b)   any  warnings,  precautions  or  measures  to  be  taken  by  the  patient  or  a  healthcare  professional  with  regard  to reciprocal  interference  with  reasonably  foreseeable  external  influences,  medical  examinations  or  environmental conditions;
- (c)   any information about the expected lifetime of the device and any necessary follow-up;
- (d)   any  other  information  to  ensure  safe  use  of  the  device  by  the  patient,  including  the  information  in  point  (u)  of Section  of Annex I. The  information  referred  to  in  the  first  subparagraph  shall  be  provided,  for  the  purpose  of  making  it  available  to  the particular  patient  who  has  been  implanted  with  the  device,  by  any  means  that  allow  rapid  access  to  that  information and  shall  be  stated  in  the  language(s)  determined  by  the  concerned  Member  State.  The  information  shall  be  written  in a  way  that  is  readily  understood  by  a  lay  person  and  shall  be  updated  where  appropriate.  Updates  of  the  information shall be made available to the patient via the website mentioned in point (a) of the first subparagraph.
In  addition,  the  manufacturer  shall  provide  the  information  referred  to  in  point  (a)  of  the  first  subparagraph  on  an implant card delivered with the device.
- 2. Member  States  shall  require  health  institutions  to  make  the  information  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  available,  by any  means  that  allow  rapid  access  to  that  information,  to  any  patients  who  have  been  implanted  with  the  device, together  with the implant card, which shall bear  their identity.
- 3. The  following  implants  shall  be  exempted  from  the  obligations  laid  down  in  this  Article:  sutures,  staples,  dental fillings,  dental  braces,  tooth  crowns,  screws,  wedges,  plates,  wires,  pins,  clips  and  connectors.  The  Commission  is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 115 to amend this list by adding other  types of  implants to it or by removing implants therefrom.
## Article 19
## EU declaration of conformity
- 1. The  EU  declaration  of  conformity  shall  state  that  the  requirements  specified  in  this  Regulation  have  been  fulfilled in  relation  to  the  device  that  is  covered.  The  manufacturer  shall  continuously  update  the  EU  declaration  of  conformity. The  EU  declaration  of  conformity  shall,  as  a  minimum,  contain  the  information  set  out  in  Annex  IV  and  shall  be translated  into  an  official  Union  language  or  languages  required  by  the  Member  State(s)  in  which  the  device  is  made available.
- 2. 