Manufacturers  shall  ensure  that  procedures  are  in  place  to  keep  series  production  in  conformity  with  the requirements of  this Regulation. Changes in device design or characteristics and changes in the harmonised standards or CS  by  reference  to  which  the  conformity  of  a  device  is  declared  shall  be  adequately  taken  into  account  in  a  timely manner.  Manufacturers  of  devices,  other  than  investigational  devices,  shall  establish,  document,  implement,  maintain, keep  up  to  date  and  continually  improve  a  quality  management  system  that  shall  ensure  compliance  with  this Regulation in the most effective manner and in a manner that is proportionate to the risk class and the type of device.
The  quality  management  system  shall  cover  all  parts  and  elements  of  a  manufacturer's  organisation  dealing  with  the quality  of  processes,  procedures  and  devices.  It  shall  govern  the  structure,  responsibilities,  procedures,  processes  and management  resources  required  to  implement  the  principles  and  actions  necessary  to  achieve  compliance  with  the provisions of this Regulation.
The quality management system shall address at least the following aspects:
- (a) a  strategy  for  regulatory  compliance,  including  compliance  with  conformity  assessment  procedures  and  procedures for  management of modifications to the devices covered by the system;
- (b) identification of applicable general safety and performance requirements and exploration of options to address those requirements;
- (c) responsibility of  the management;
- (d) resource management, including selection and control of suppliers and sub-contractors;
- (e) risk management as set out in in Section 3 of Annex I;
- (f) clinical evaluation in accordance with Article 61 and Annex XIV, including PMCF;
- (g) product realisation, including planning, design, development, production and service provision;
- (h) verification  of  the  UDI  assignments  made  in  accordance  with  Article  27(3)  to  all  relevant  devices  and  ensuring consistency and validity of information provided in accordance with Article 29;
- (i) setting-up, implementation and maintenance of a post-market surveillance system, in accordance with Article 83;
- (j) handling  communication  with  competent  authorities,  notified  bodies,  other  economic  operators,  customers  and/or other stakeholders;
- (k) processes for reporting of serious incidents and field safety corrective actions in the context of vigilance;
- (l) management of corrective and preventive actions and verification of their effectiveness;
- (m)   processes for  monitoring and measurement of output, data analysis and product improvement.
- 10. Manufacturers of devices shall  implement  and keep up to date  the post-market surveillance system in accordance with Article 83.
- 11. Manufacturers shall ensure that the device is accompanied by the information set out in Section 23 of Annex I in an  official  Union  language(s)  determined  by  the  Member  State  in  which  the  device  is  made  available  to  the  user  or patient.  The  particulars  on  the  label  shall  be  indelible,  easily  legible  and  clearly  comprehensible  to  the  intended  user  or patient.
- 12. Manufacturers who consider or have reason to believe that a device which they have placed on the market or put into service is not in conformity with this Regulation shall immediately take the necessary corrective action to bring that device  into  conformity,  to withdraw  it  or  to  recall  it,  as  appropriate.  They  shall  inform  the  distributors  of  the  device  in question and, where applicable, the authorised representative and importers accordingly.
Where  the  device  presents  a  serious  risk,  manufacturers  shall  immediately  inform  the  competent  authorities  of  the Member States in which they made the device available and, where applicable, the  notified  body that issued  a  certificate for  the device in accordance with Article 56, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective action taken.
- 13. Manufacturers  shall  have  a  system  for  recording  and  reporting  of  incidents  and  field  safety  corrective  actions  as described in Articles 87 and 88. - 14. Manufacturers  shall,  upon  request  by  a  competent  authority,  provide  it  with  all  the  information  and  documen­ tation  necessary  to  demonstrate  the  conformity  of the  device,  in  an  official  Union  language  determined  by  the Member  State  concerned.  The  competent  authority  of  the  Member  State  in  which  the  manufacturer  has  its  registered place  of  business  may  require  that  the  manufacturer  provide  samples  of  the  device  free  of  charge  or,  where  that  is impracticable,  grant  access  to  the  device.  Manufacturers  shall  cooperate  with  a  competent  authority,  at  its  request,  on any  corrective  action  taken  to  eliminate  or,  if  that  is  not  possible,  mitigate  the  risks  posed  by  devices  which  they  have placed on the market or put into service.
If  the  manufacturer  fails  to  cooperate  or  the  information  and  documentation  provided  is  incomplete  or  incorrect,  the competent  authority  may,  in  order  to  ensure  the  protection  of  public  health  and  patient  safety,  take  all  appropriate measures  to  prohibit  or  restrict  the  device's  being  made  available  on  its  national  market,  to  withdraw  the  device  from that market or  to recall it until the manufacturer cooperates or provides complete and correct information.
If  a  competent  authority  considers  or  has  reason  to  believe  that  a  device  has  caused  damage,  it  shall,  upon  request, facilitate  the  provision  of  the  information  and  documentation  referred  to  in  the  first  subparagraph  to  the  potentially injured  patient  or  user  and,  as  appropriate,  the  patient's  or  user's  successor  in  title,  the  patient's  or  user's  health insurance company or other third parties affected by the damage caused to the patient or user, without prejudice to data protection  rules  and,  unless  there  is  an  overriding  public  interest  in  disclosure,  without  prejudice  to  the  protection  of intellectual property rights.
The competent authority need  not  comply  with  the  obligation  laid  down  in  the  third  subparagraph  where  disclosure  of the  information  and  documentation  referred  to  in  the  first  subparagraph  is  ordinarily  dealt  with  in  the  context  of  legal proceedings.
- 15. Where  manufacturers  have  their  devices  designed  or  manufactured  by  another  legal  or  natural  person  the information  on  the  identity  of  that  person  shall  be  part  of  the  information  to  be  submitted  in  accordance  with Article 30(1).
- 16. Natural  or  legal  persons  may  claim  compensation  for  damage  caused  by  a  defective  device  in  accordance  with applicable Union and national law.
