The information referred to in paragraph 1 of  this Article shall be made available through the electronic system to the  competent  authorities  of  the  Member  States  and  to  the  Commission.  The  notified  bodies  shall  also  have  access  to that information to the extent that it relates to devices for  which they issued a certificate in accordance with Article 53.
- 3. The  Commission  shall  ensure  that  healthcare  professionals  and  the  public  have  appropriate  levels  of  access  to  the electronic system referred to in paragraph 1.
- 4. On  the  basis  of  arrangements  between  the  Commission  and  competent  authorities  of  third  countries  or  internat­ ional  organisations,  the  Commission  may  grant  those  competent  authorities  or  international  organisations  access  to  the electronic  system  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  at  the  appropriate  level.  Those  arrangements  shall  be  based  on  reciprocity and make provision for confidentiality and data protection equivalent to those applicable in the Union.
- 5. The  reports  on  serious  incidents  referred  to  in  point  (a)  of  Article  87(1)  shall  be  automatically  transmitted,  upon receipt,  via  the  electronic  system  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  of this Article,  to  the  competent  authority  of  the Member State in which the incident occurred.
- 6. The  trend  reports  referred  to  in  Article  88(1)  shall  be  automatically  transmitted  upon  receipt  via  the  electronic system  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  of  this  Article  to  the  competent  authorities  of  the  Member  State  in  which  the incidents occurred.
- 7. The  reports  on  field  safety  corrective  actions  referred  to  in  point  (b)  of  Article  87(1)  shall  be  automatically transmitted upon receipt via the electronic system referred to in paragraph 1 of  this Article to the competent authorities of  the following Member States:
- (a)   the  Member States in which the field safety corrective action is being or is to be undertaken;
- (b)   the  Member State in which the manufacturer has its registered place of business.
- 8. The  periodic  summary  reports  referred  to  in  Article  87(9)  shall  be  automatically  transmitted  upon  receipt  via  the electronic system referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article to the competent authority of:
- (a)   the  Member  State  or  Member  States  participating  in  the  coordination  procedure  in  accordance  with  Article  89(9) and which have agreed on the periodic summary report;
- (b)   the  Member State in which the manufacturer has its registered place of business.
- 9. The  information  referred  to  in  paragraphs  5  to  8  of  this  Article  shall  be  automatically  transmitted,  upon  receipt, through  the  electronic  system  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  of  this  Article,  to  the  notified  body  that  issued  the  certificate for  the device in question in accordance with Article 56. ## Market surveillance
Article 93
## Market surveillance activities
- 1. The competent authorities  shall  perform  appropriate  checks  on  the  conformity characteristics  and  performance  of devices  including,  where  appropriate,  a  review  of  documentation  and  physical  or  laboratory  checks  on  the  basis  of adequate  samples.  The  competent  authorities  shall,  in  particular,  take  account  of  established  principles  regarding  risk assessment and risk management, vigilance data and complaints.
- 2. The  competent  authorities  shall  draw  up  annual  surveillance  activity  plans  and  allocate  a  sufficient  number  of material and competent human resources in order  to carry out those activities taking into account the European market surveillance programme developed by the MDCG pursuant to Article 105 and local circumstances.
- 3. In order  to fulfil the obligations laid down in paragraph 1, the competent authorities:
- (a)   may  require  economic  operators  to, inter  alia ,  make  available  the  documentation  and  information  necessary  for  the purpose of carrying out the authorities' activities and, where justified, to provide the necessary samples of devices or access to devices free of charge; and
- (b)   shall  carry  out  both  announced  and,  if  necessary,  unannounced  inspections  of  the  premises  of  economic  operators, as well as suppliers and/or subcontractors, and, where necessary, at the facilities of professional users.
- 4. The competent authorities shall prepare an annual summary of  the results of  their surveillance activities and make it  accessible to other competent authorities by means of the electronic system referred to in Article 100.
- 5. The  competent  authorities may  confiscate, destroy or otherwise render inoperable devices that present an unacceptable  risk  or  falsified  devices  where  they  deem  it  necessary  to  do  so  in  the  interests  of  the  protection  of  public health.
- 6. Following  each  inspection  carried  out  for  the  purposes  referred  to  in  paragraph  1,  the  competent  authority  shall draw  up  a  report  on  the  findings  of  the  inspection  that  concern  compliance  with  the  legal  and  technical  requirements applicable under this Regulation. The report shall set out any corrective actions needed.
- 7. The competent authority which carried out the inspection shall communicate the content of  the report referred to in  paragraph  6  of  this  Article  to  the  economic  operator  that  has  been  the  subject  of  the  inspection.  Before  adopting  the final  report,  the  competent  authority  shall  give  that economic  operator  the  opportunity  to submit  comments.  That  final inspection report shall be entered in the electronic system provided for in Article 100.
- 8. The Member States shall review and assess the functioning of  their  market surveillance activities. Such reviews and assessments  shall  be  carried  out  at  least  every  four  years  and  the  results  thereof  shall  be  communicated  to  the  other Member States and the Commission. Each Member State shall make a summary of the results accessible to the public by means of the electronic system referred to in Article 100.
- 9. The  competent  authorities  of  the  Member  States  shall  coordinate  their  market  surveillance  activities,  cooperate with  each  other  and  share  with  each  other  and  with  the  Commission  the  results  thereof,  to  provide  for  a  harmonised and high level of market surveillance in all Member States.
Where  appropriate, the competent  authorities of the  Member  States shall agree on  work-sharing, joint market surveillance activities and specialisation.
- 10. Where  more  than  one  authority  in  a  Member  State  is  responsible  for  market  surveillance  and  external  border controls, those authorities shall cooperate with each other, by sharing information relevant to their role and functions.
- 11. Where  appropriate,  the competent  authorities of the Member  States  shall cooperate with the  competent authorities  of  third  countries  with  a  view  to  exchanging  information  and  technical  support  and  promoting  activities relating to market surveillance. ## Article 94
## Evaluation of devices suspected of presenting an unacceptable risk or other non-compliance
Where  the  competent  authorities  of  a  Member  State,  based  on  data  obtained  by  vigilance  or  market  surveillance activities or on other  information, have reason to believe that a device:
- (a)   may  present  an  unacceptable  risk  to  the  health  or  safety  of  patients,  users  or  other  persons,  or  to  other  aspects  of the protection of public health; or
- (b)   otherwise does not comply with the requirements laid down in this Regulation,
they  shall  carry  out  an  evaluation  of  the  device  concerned  covering  all  requirements  laid  down  in  this  Regulation relating to the risk presented by the device, or  to any other non-compliance of the device.
The relevant economic operators shall cooperate with the competent authorities.
## Article 95
## Procedure for dealing with devices presenting an unacceptable risk to health and safety
- 1. Where,  having  performed  an  evaluation  pursuant  to  Article  94,  the  competent  authorities  find  that  the  device presents  an  unacceptable  risk  to  the  health  or  safety  of  patients,  users  or  other  persons,  or  to  other  aspects  of  the protection  of  public  health,  they  shall  without  delay  require  the  manufacturer  of  the  devices  concerned,  its  authorised representative  and  all  other  relevant  economic  operators  to  take  all  appropriate  and  duly  justified  corrective  action  to bring  the  device  into  compliance  with  the  requirements  of  this  Regulation  relating  to  the  risk  presented  by  the  device and,  in  a  manner  that  is  proportionate  to  the  nature  of  the  risk,  to  restrict  the  making  available  of  the  device  on  the market,  to  subject  the  making  available  of  the  device  to  specific  requirements,  to withdraw  the  device  from  the  market, or  to recall it, within a reasonable period that is clearly defined and communicated to the relevant economic operator.
- 2. The  competent  authorities  shall,  without  delay,  notify  the  Commission,  the  other  Member  States  and,  where a  certificate  has  been  issued  in  accordance  with  Article  56  for  the  device  concerned,  the  notified  body  that  issued  that certificate,  of  the  results  of  the  evaluation  and  of  the  actions  which  they  have  required  the  economic  operators  to  take, by means of the electronic system referred to in Article 100.
- 3. The  economic  operators  as  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  shall,  without  delay,  ensure  that  all  appropriate  corrective action  is  taken  throughout  the  Union  in  respect  of  all  the  devices  concerned  that  they  have  made  available  on  the market.
- 4. Where  the  economic  operator  as  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  does  not  take  adequate  corrective  action  within  the period  referred  to  in  paragraph  1,  the  competent  authorities  shall  take  all  appropriate  measures  to  prohibit  or  restrict the making available of the device on their national market, to withdraw the device from that market or to recall it.
The  competent  authorities  shall  notify  the  Commission,  the  other  Member  States  and  the  notified  body  referred  to  in paragraph  2  of  this  Article,  without  delay,  of  those  measures,  by  means  of  the  electronic  system  referred  to  in Article 100.
- 5. The notification referred to in paragraph 4 shall include all available details, in particular  the data necessary for  the identification  and  tracing  of  the  non-compliant  device,  the  origin  of  the  device,  the  nature  of  and  the  reasons  for  the non-compliance  alleged  and  the  risk  involved,  the  nature  and  duration  of the  national  measures  taken  and  the arguments put forward by the relevant economic operator.
- 6. Member States  other  than  the  Member  State  initiating  the  procedure  shall,  without  delay,  inform  the  Commission and  the  other  Member  States,  by  means  of  the  electronic  system  referred  to  in  Article  100,  of  any  additional  relevant information  at  their  disposal  relating  to  the  non-compliance  of  the  device  concerned  and  of  any  measures  adopted  by them in relation to the device concerned.
In  the  event  of  disagreement  with  the  notified  national  measure,  they  shall,  without  delay,  inform  the  Commission  and the other Member States of their objections, by means of the electronic system referred to in Article 100.
- 7. Where,  within  two  months  of  receipt  of  the  notification  referred  to  in  paragraph  4,  no  objection  has  been  raised by either  a  Member  State or  the  Commission  in  respect of  any  measures  taken  by a  Member  State, those  measures  shall be deemed to be justified. In  that  case,  all  Member  States  shall  ensure  that  corresponding  appropriate restrictive  or  prohibitive  measures,  including withdrawing,  recalling  or  limiting  the  availability  of  the  device  on  their  national  market,  are  taken  without  delay  in respect of the device concerned.
## Article 96
## Procedure for evaluating national measures at Union level
- 1. Where,  within  two  months  of  receipt  of  the  notification  referred  to  in  Article  95(4),  objections  are  raised  by a  Member  State  against  a  measure  taken  by  another  Member  State,  or  where  the  Commission  considers  the  measure  to be  contrary  to  Union  law,  the  Commission  shall,  after  consulting  the  competent  authorities  concerned  and,  where necessary,  the  economic  operators  concerned,  evaluate  that  national  measure.  On  the  basis  of  the  results  of  that evaluation,  the  Commission  may  decide,  by  means  of  implementing  acts,  whether  or  not  the  national  measure  is justified.  Those  implementing  acts  shall  be  adopted  in  accordance  with  the  examination  procedure  referred  to  in Article 114(3).
- 2. Where the Commission considers the national measure to be justified as referred to in paragraph 1 of  this Article, the second  subparagraph  of  Article  95(7)  shall  apply.  If the  Commission  considers  the  national  measure  to  be unjustified, the Member State concerned shall withdraw the measure.
Where the Commission does not adopt a decision pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article within eight months of receipt of  the notification referred to in Article 95(4), the national measure shall be considered to be justified.
- 3. Where  a  Member  State  or  the  Commission  considers  that  the  risk  to  health  and  safety  emanating  from  a  device cannot  be  mitigated  satisfactorily  by  means  of  measures  taken  by  the  Member  State  or  Member  States  concerned,  the Commission,  at  the  request  of  a  Member  State  or  on  its  own  initiative,  may  take,  by  means  of  implementing  acts,  the necessary  and  duly  justified  measures  to  ensure  the  protection  of  health  and  safety,  including  measures  restricting  or prohibiting  the  placing  on  the  market  and  putting  into  service  of  the  device  concerned.  Those  implementing  acts  shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 114(3).
## Article 97
## Other non-compliance
- 1. Where,  having  performed  an  evaluation  pursuant  to  Article  94,  the  competent  authorities  of  a  Member  State  find that  a  device  does  not  comply  with  the  requirements  laid  down  in  this  Regulation  but  does  not  present  an  unacceptable risk to the health or safety of patients, users or other persons, or  to other aspects of the protection of public health, they shall  require  the  relevant  economic  operator  to  bring  the  non-compliance  concerned  to  an  end  within  a  reasonable period  that  is  clearly  defined  and  communicated  to  the  economic  operator  and  that  is  proportionate  to  the  noncompliance.
- 2. Where  the  economic  operator  does  not  bring  the  non-compliance  to  an  end  within  the  period  referred  to  in paragraph 1 of  this Article, the Member State concerned shall, without delay, take all appropriate measures to restrict or prohibit  the  product  being  made  available  on  the  market  or  to  ensure  that  it  is  recalled  or  withdrawn  from  the  market. That  Member  State  shall  inform  the  Commission  and  the  other  Member  States,  without  delay,  of  those  measures,  by means of the electronic system referred to in Article 100.
- 3. In  order  to  ensure  the  uniform  application  of  this  Article,  the  Commission  may,  by  means  of  implementing  acts, specify  appropriate  measures  to  be  taken  by  competent  authorities  to  address  given  types  of  non-compliance.  Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 114(3).
## Article 98
## Preventive health protection measures
- 1. Where a Member State, after having performed an evaluation which indicates a potential risk related to a device or a  specific  category  or  group  of  devices,  considers  that,  in  order  to  protect  the  health  and  safety  of  patients,  users  or other persons or other aspects of public health, the making available on the market or putting into service of a device or a  specific  category  or  group  of  devices  should  be  prohibited,  restricted  or  made  subject  to  particular  requirements  or that  such  device  or  category  or  group  of  devices  should  be  withdrawn  from  the  market  or  recalled,  it  may  take  any necessary and justified measures. - 2. The Member State referred to in paragraph 1 shall immediately notify the Commission and all other Member States, giving the reasons for its decision, by means of the electronic system referred to in Article 100.
- 3. The  Commission,  in  consultation  with  the  MDCG  and,  where  necessary,  the  economic  operators  concerned,  shall assess  the  national  measures  taken.  The  Commission  may  decide,  by  means  of  implementing  acts,  whether  the  national measures  are  justified  or  not.  In  the  absence  of  a  Commission  decision  within  six  months  of  their  notification,  the national  measures  shall  be  considered  to  be  justified.  Those  implementing  acts  shall  be  adopted  in  accordance  with  the examination procedure referred to in Article 114(3).
- 4. Where  the  assessment  referred  to  in  paragraph  3  of  this  Article  demonstrates  that  the  making  available  on  the market or  putting into service of a device, specific category or group of devices should be prohibited, restricted or  made subject  to  particular  requirements  or  that  such  device  or  category  or  group  of  devices  should  be  withdrawn  from  the market  or  recalled  in  all  Member  States  in  order  to  protect  the  health  and  safety  of  patients,  users  or  other  persons  or other  aspects  of  public  health,  the  Commission  may  adopt  implementing  acts  to  take  the  necessary  and  duly  justified measures.  Those  implementing  acts  shall  be  adopted  in  accordance  with  the  examination  procedure  referred  to  in Article 114(3).
## Article 99
## Good administrative practice
- 1. Any measure adopted by the competent authorities of  the Member States pursuant to Articles 95 to 98 shall state the  exact  grounds  on  which  it  is  based.  Where  such  a  measure  is  addressed  to  a  specific  economic  operator,  the competent authority shall notify without delay the economic operator concerned of  that measure, and shall at the same time  inform  that  economic  operator  of  the  remedies  available  under  the  law  or  the  administrative  practice  of  the Member State concerned and of the time limits to which such remedies are subject. Where the measure is of general ap­ plicability, it shall be appropriately published.
