The  Commission  shall  submit  this  overview  to  the European Parliament, to the Council and to the MDCG.
- 5. The  Commission  shall  by  27  May  2025  draw  up  a  report  on  the  operation  of  this  Article  and  submit  it  to  the European  Parliament  and  to  the  Council.  The  report  shall  take  into  account  the  annual  overviews  and  any  available relevant  recommendations  from  the  MDCG.  On  the  basis  of  that  report  the  Commission  shall,  if  appropriate,  make proposals for amendments to this Regulation.
## Article 55
## Mechanism for scrutiny of conformity assessments of certain class III and class IIb devices
- 1. A  notified  body  shall  notify  the  competent  authorities  of  certificates  it  has  granted  to  devices  for  which  the conformity  assessment  has  been  performed  pursuant  to  Article  54(1).  Such  notification  shall  take  place  through  the electronic system referred to in Article 57 and shall include the summary of safety and clinical performance pursuant to Article  32,  the  assessment  report  by  the  notified  body,  the  instructions  for  use  referred  to  in  Section    of  Annex  I, and,  where  applicable,  the  scientific  opinion  of  the  expert  panels  referred  to  in  Section    of  Annex  IX or  Section  6  of Annex  X,  as  applicable.  In  the  case  of  divergent  views  between  the  notified  body  and  the  expert  panels,  a  full  justifi­ cation shall also be included.
- 2. A  competent  authority  and,  where  applicable,  the  Commission  may,  based  on  reasonable  concerns  apply  further procedures in accordance with Article 44, 45, 46, 47 or 94 and, where deemed necessary, take appropriate measures in accordance with Articles 95 and 97.
- 3. The  MDCG  and,  where  applicable,  the  Commission,  may,  based  on  reasonable  concerns,  request  scientific  advice from the expert panels in relation to the safety and performance of any device.
## Article 56
## Certificates of conformity
- 1. The certificates issued by the notified bodies in accordance with Annexes IX, X and XI shall be in an official Union language  determined  by  the  Member  State  in  which  the  notified  body  is  established  or  otherwise  in  an  official  Union language acceptable to the notified body. The minimum content of the certificates shall be as set out in Annex XII.
- 2. The certificates  shall  be  valid  for  the  period  they  indicate,  which  shall  not  exceed  five  years.  On  application  by  the manufacturer, the validity of  the certificate  may  be  extended  for  further  periods,  each not exceeding five  years, based  on a  re-assessment  in  accordance  with  the  applicable  conformity  assessment  procedures.  Any  supplement  to  a  certificate shall remain valid as long as the certificate which it supplements is valid.
- 3. Notified  bodies  may  impose  restrictions  to  the  intended  purpose  of  a  device  to  certain  groups  of  patients  or require manufacturers to undertake specific PMCF studies pursuant to Part B of Annex XIV. - 4. Where  a  notified  body  finds  that  the  requirements  of  this  Regulation  are  no  longer  met  by  the  manufacturer,  it shall,  taking  account  of  the  principle  of  proportionality,  suspend  or  withdraw  the  certificate  issued  or  impose  any restrictions  on  it  unless  compliance  with  such  requirements  is  ensured  by  appropriate  corrective  action  taken  by  the manufacturer  within  an  appropriate  deadline  set  by  the  notified  body.  The  notified  body  shall  give  the  reasons  for  its decision.
- 5. The  notified  body  shall  enter  in  the  electronic  system  referred  to  in  Article  57  any  information  regarding certificates  issued,  including  amendments  and  supplements  thereto,  and  regarding  suspended,  reinstated,  withdrawn  or refused certificates and restrictions imposed on certificates. Such information shall be accessible to the public.
- 6. In  the  light  of  technical  progress,  the  Commission  is  empowered  to  adopt  delegated  acts  in  accordance  with Article 115 amending the minimum content of the certificates set out in Annex XII.
## Article 57
## Electronic system on notified bodies and on certificates of conformity
- 1. The Commission, after consulting the MDCG, shall set up and manage an electronic system to collate and process the following information:
- (a)   the  list of  subsidiaries referred to in Article 37(3);
- (b)   the  list of experts referred to in Article 40(2);
- (c)   the  information  relating  to the  notification  referred  to in  Article  42(10)  and  the amended  notifications  referred  to in Article 46(2);
- (d)   the  list of  notified  bodies  referred to in Article 43(2);
- (e)   the  summary of  the report referred to in Article 44(12);
- (f)   the notifications for conformity assessments and certificates referred to in Articles 54(3) and 55(1);
- (g)   withdrawal or refusals of  applications  for the certificates as referred to  in  Article  53(2)  and  Section    of Annex VII;
- (h)   the  information regarding certificates referred to in Article 56(5);
- (i)   the summary of safety and clinical performance referred to in Article 32.
- 2. The information collated and processed by the electronic system shall be accessible to the competent authorities of the  Member  States,  to  the  Commission,  where  appropriate  to  the  notified  bodies  and  where  provided  elsewhere  in  this regulation or in Regulation (EU) 2017/746 to the public.
## Article 58
## Voluntary change of notified body
- 1. In  cases  where a  manufacturer  terminates its contract with a notified body and enters into a contract with another notified  body  in  respect  of  the  conformity  assessment  of  the  same  device,  the  detailed  arrangements  for  the  change  of notified body shall be clearly defined in an agreement between the manufacturer, the incoming notified body and, where practicable the outgoing notified body. That agreement shall cover at least the following aspects:
- (a)   the  date on which the certificates issued by the outgoing notified body become invalid;
- (b)   the  date  until  which  the  identification  number  of  the  outgoing  notified  body  may  be  indicated  in  the  information supplied by the manufacturer, including any promotional material;
- (c)   the  transfer of documents, including confidentiality aspects and property rights;
- (d)   the  date  after  which  the  conformity  assessment  tasks  of  the  outgoing  notified  body  is  assigned  to  the  incoming notified body;
- (e)   the  last  serial  number or lot number for  which the outgoing notified body is responsible.
- 2. The  outgoing  notified  body  shall  withdraw  the  certificates  it  has  issued  for  the  device  concerned  on  the  date  on which they become invalid. ## Article 59
## Derogation from the conformity assessment procedures
- 1. By  way  of  derogation  from  Article  52,  any  competent  authority  may  authorise,  on  a  duly  justified  request,  the placing on the market or putting into service within the territory of the Member State concerned, of a specific device for which  the  procedures  referred  to  in  that  Article  have  not  been  carried  out  but  use  of  which  is  in  the  interest  of  public health or patient safety or health.
- 2. The  Member  State  shall  inform  the  Commission  and  the  other  Member  States  of  any  decision  to  authorise  the placing  on  the  market  or  putting  into  service  of  a  device  in  accordance  with  paragraph  1  where  such  authorisation  is granted for use other  than for a single patient.
- 3. Following  a  notification  pursuant  to  paragraph  2  of  this  Article,  the  Commission,  in  exceptional  cases  relating  to public  health  or  patient  safety  or  health,  may,  by  means  of  implementing  acts,  extend  for  a  limited  period  of  time  the validity of an authorisation granted by a Member State in accordance with paragraph 1 of  this Article to the territory of the  Union  and  set  the  conditions  under  which  the  device  may  be  placed  on  the  market  or  put  into  service.  Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 114(3).
On  duly  justified  imperative  grounds  of  urgency  relating  to  the  health  and  safety  of  humans,  the  Commission  shall adopt immediately applicable implementing acts in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 114(4).
## Article 60
## Certificate of free sale
- 1. For  the  purpose  of  export  and  upon  request  by  a  manufacturer  or  an  authorised  representative,  the  Member  State in  which  the  manufacturer  or  the  authorised  representative  has  its  registered  place  of  business  shall  issue  a  certificate  of free  sale  declaring  that  the  manufacturer  or  the  authorised  representative,  as  applicable,  has  its  registered  place  of business on its territory  and that  the device  in  question  bearing  the CE  marking in accordance with this Regulation  may be  marketed  in  the  Union.  The  certificate  of  free  sale  shall  set  out  the  Basic  UDI-DI  of  the  device  as  provided  to  the UDI  database  under  Article  29.  Where  a  notified  body  has  issued  a  certificate  pursuant  to  Article  56,  the  certificate  of free  sale  shall  set  out  the  unique  number  identifying  the  certificate  issued  by  the  notified  body,  as  referred  to  in Section 3 of Chapter II of Annex XII.
- 2. The  Commission  may,  by  means  of  implementing  acts,  establish  a  model  for  certificates  of  free  sale,  taking  into account international practice  as  regards the  use  of  certificates  of  free  sale.  Those  implementing acts  shall  be  adopted  in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 114(2).
## CHAPTER VI
## CLINICAL EVALUATION AND CLINICAL INVESTIGATIONS
## Article 61
## Clinical evaluation
- 1. Confirmation  of  conformity  with  relevant  general  safety  and  performance  requirements  set  out  in  Annex  I  under the  normal  conditions  of  the  intended  use  of  the  device,  and  the  evaluation  of  the  undesirable  side-effects  and  of  the acceptability  of  the  benefit-risk-  ratio  referred  to  in  Sections  1  and  8  of  Annex  I,  shall  be  based  on  clinical  data providing sufficient clinical evidence, including where applicable relevant data as referred to in Annex III.
The  manufacturer  shall  specify  and  justify  the  level  of  clinical  evidence  necessary  to  demonstrate  conformity  with  the relevant  general  safety  and  performance  requirements.  That  level  of  clinical  evidence  shall  be  appropriate  in  view  of  the characteristics of the device and its intended purpose.
To  that  end,  manufacturers  shall  plan,  conduct  and  document  a  clinical  evaluation  in  accordance  with  this  Article  and Part A of Annex XIV. - 2. For all  class  III  devices  and  for  the  class  IIb  devices  referred  to  in  point  (b)  of  Article  54(1),  the  manufacturer  may, prior  to its  clinical  evaluation and/or  investigation, consult an expert panel as referred to in Article 106, with the aim of reviewing  the manufacturer's  intended  clinical  development  strategy  and  proposals  for clinical investigation.  The manufacturer  shall  give  due  consideration  to  the  views  expressed  by  the  expert  panel.  Such  consideration  shall  be documented in the clinical evaluation report referred to in paragraph 12 of this Article.
The  manufacturer  may  not  invoke  any  rights  to  the  views  expressed  by  the  expert  panel  with  regard  to  any  future conformity assessment procedure.
- 3. A clinical evaluation shall follow a defined and methodologically sound procedure based on the following:
- (a)   a  critical  evaluation  of  the  relevant  scientific  literature  currently  available  relating  to  the  safety,  performance,  design characteristics and intended purpose of the device, where the following conditions are satisfied:
- -  it  is  demonstrated  that  the  device  subject  to  clinical  evaluation  for  the  intended  purpose  is  equivalent  to  the device to which the data relate, in accordance with Section 3 of Annex XIV, and
- -  the data adequately demonstrate compliance with the relevant general safety and performance requirements;
- (b)   a  critical  evaluation  of  the  results  of  all  available  clinical  investigations,  taking  duly  into  consideration  whether  the investigations were performed under Articles 62 to 80, any acts adopted pursuant to Article 81, and Annex XV; and
- (c)   a  consideration of currently available alternative treatment options for  that purpose, if any.
- 4. In the case of implantable devices and class III devices, clinical investigations shall be performed, except if:
- -  the device has been designed by modifications of a device already marketed by the same manufacturer,
- -  the  modified  device  has  been  demonstrated  by  the  manufacturer  to  be  equivalent  to  the  marketed  device,  in accordance with Section 3 of Annex XIV and this demonstration has been endorsed by the notified body, and
- -  the clinical evaluation of  the marketed device is sufficient to demonstrate conformity of  the modified device with the relevant safety and performance requirements.
In  this  case,  the  notified  body  shall  check  that  the  PMCF  plan  is  appropriate  and  includes  post  market  studies  to demonstrate the safety and performance of the device.
In addition, clinical investigations need not be performed in the cases referred to in paragraph 6.
- 5. A  manufacturer  of  a  device  demonstrated  to  be  equivalent  to  an  already  marketed  device  not  manufactured  by him,  may  also  rely  on  paragraph  4  in  order  not  to  perform  a  clinical  investigation  provided  that  the  following conditions are fulfilled in addition to what is required in that paragraph:
- -  the  two  manufacturers  have  a  contract  in  place  that  explicitly  allows  the  manufacturer  of  the  second  device  full access to the technical documentation on an ongoing basis, and
- -  the original clinical evaluation has been performed in compliance with the requirements of this Regulation,
- and the manufacturer of the second device provides clear evidence thereof to the notified body.
- 6. The requirement  to  perform  clinical  investigations  pursuant  to  paragraph  4  shall  not  apply  to  implantable  devices and class III devices:
- (a)   which  have  been  lawfully  placed  on  the  market  or  put  into  service  in  accordance  with  Directive  90/385/EEC  or Directive 93/42/EEC and for which the clinical evaluation:
- -  is based on sufficient clinical data, and
- -  is  in  compliance  with  the  relevant  product-specific  CS  for  the  clinical  evaluation  of  that  kind  of  device,  where such a CS is available; or
- (b)   that  are  sutures,  staples,  dental  fillings,  dental  braces,  tooth  crowns,  screws,  wedges,  plates,  wires,  pins,  clips  or connectors for  which the clinical evaluation is based on sufficient clinical data and is in compliance with the relevant product-specific CS, where such a CS is available. - 7. Cases  in  which  paragraph  4  is  not  applied  by  virtue  of  paragraph  6  shall  be  justified  in  the  clinical  evaluation report by the manufacturer and in the clinical evaluation assessment report by the notified body.
- 8. Where  justified  in  view  of  well-established  technologies,  similar  to  those  used  in  the  exempted  devices  listed  in point (b) of paragraph 6 of this Article, being used in other devices, or  where justified in order  to protect the health and safety  of  patients,  users  or  other  persons  or  other  aspects  of  public  health,  the  Commission  is  empowered  to  adopt delegated  acts  in  accordance  with  Article  115  to  amend  the  list  of  exempted  devices  referred  to  in  the  second subparagraph  of  Article  52(4)  and  in  point  (b)  of  paragraph  6  of  this  Article,  by  adding  other  types  of  implantable  or class III  devices to that list or  removing devices therefrom.
- 9. 