Where,  concerning  aspects  not  covered  by  this  Regulation,  devices  are  subject  to  other  Union  legislation  which also  requires  an  EU  declaration  of  conformity  by the  manufacturer  that  fulfilment  of  the  requirements  of  that  legislation has  been  demonstrated,  a  single  EU  declaration  of  conformity  shall  be  drawn  up  in  respect  of  all  Union  acts  applicable to  the  device.  The  declaration  shall  contain  all  the  information  required  for  identification  of  the  Union  legislation  to which the declaration relates.
- 3. By drawing up the EU declaration of conformity, the manufacturer shall assume responsibility for compliance with the requirements of this Regulation and all other Union legislation applicable to the device.
- 4. The  Commission  is  empowered  to  adopt  delegated  acts  in  accordance  with  Article  115  amending  the  minimum content of the EU declaration of conformity set out in Annex IV in the light of technical progress.
## Article 20
## CE marking of conformity
- 1. Devices,  other  than  custom-made or  investigational devices,  considered  to be  in  conformity  with  the  requirements of  this Regulation shall bear  the CE marking of conformity, as presented in Annex V.
- 2. The CE marking shall be subject to the general principles set out in Article 30 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008.
- 3. The  CE  marking  shall  be  affixed  visibly,  legibly  and  indelibly  to  the  device  or  its  sterile  packaging.  Where  such affixing  is  not  possible  or  not  warranted  on  account  of  the  nature  of  the  device,  the  CE  marking  shall  be  affixed  to  the packaging. The CE marking shall also appear in any instructions for use and on any sales packaging.
- 4. The  CE  marking  shall  be  affixed  before  the  device  is  placed  on  the  market.  It  may  be  followed  by  a  pictogram  or any other mark indicating a special risk or use.
- 5. Where applicable,  the  CE  marking  shall  be  followed  by  the  identification  number  of  the  notified  body  responsible for  the  conformity  assessment  procedures  set out  in  Article  52.  The  identification  number  shall  also  be  indicated  in  any promotional material which mentions that a device fulfils the requirements for CE marking.
- 6. Where  devices  are  subject  to  other  Union  legislation  which  also  provides  for  the  affixing  of  the  CE  marking,  the CE marking shall indicate that the devices also fulfil the requirements of that other legislation. ## Article 21
## Devices for special purposes
- 1. Member States shall not create obstacles to:
- (a)   investigational  devices  being  supplied  to  an  investigator  for  the  purpose  of  a  clinical  investigation  if  they  meet  the conditions  laid  down  in  Articles  62  to  80  and  Article  82,  in  the  implementing  acts  adopted  pursuant  to  Article  81 and in Annex XV;
- (b)   custom-made devices being made available on the market if Article 52(8) and Annex XIII have been complied with.
The  devices  referred  to  in  the  first  subparagraph  shall  not  bear  the  CE  marking,  with  the  exception  of  the  devices referred to in Article 74.
- 2. Custom-made devices shall be accompanied by the statement referred to in Section 1 of Annex XIII, which shall be made available to the particular patient or user identified by name, an acronym or a numerical code.
Member States  may  require  that  the  manufacturer  of  a  custom-made  device  submit  to  the  competent  authority  a  list  of such devices which have been made available in their territory.
- 3. At  trade  fairs,  exhibitions,  demonstrations  or  similar  events,  Member  States  shall  not  create  obstacles  to  the showing of devices which do not comply with this Regulation, provided a visible sign clearly indicates that such devices are  intended  for  presentation  or  demonstration  purposes  only  and  cannot  be  made  available  until  they  have  been brought into compliance with this Regulation.
## Article 22
## Systems and procedure packs
- 1. Natural  or  legal  persons  shall  draw  up  a  statement  if  they  combine  devices  bearing  a  CE  marking  with  the following  other  devices  or  products,  in  a  manner  that  is  compatible  with  the  intended  purpose  of  the  devices  or  other products and within the limits of use specified by their  manufacturers, in order  to place them on the market as a system or  procedure pack:
- (a)   other devices bearing the CE marking;
- (b) in vitro diagnostic medical devices bearing the CE marking in conformity with Regulation (EU) 2017/746;
- (c)   other  products  which  are  in  conformity  with  legislation  that  applies  to  those  products  only  where  they  are  used within a medical procedure or their presence in the system or procedure pack is otherwise justified.
- 2. In the statement made pursuant to paragraph 1, the natural or legal person concerned shall declare that:
- (a) they verified the mutual compatibility of  the devices and, if applicable other  products, in accordance with the manu­ facturers' instructions and have carried out their activities in accordance with those instructions;
- (b)   they  packaged the system or procedure pack  and supplied relevant information to users incorporating the information to be supplied by the manufacturers of the devices or other products which have been put together;
- (c)   the  activity  of  combining  devices  and,  if  applicable,  other  products  as  a  system  or  procedure  pack  was  subject  to appropriate methods of internal monitoring, verification and validation.
- 3. Any natural  or  legal  person  who  sterilises  systems  or  procedure  packs  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  for  the  purpose of  placing  them  on  the  market  shall,  at  their  choice,  apply  one  of  the  procedures  set  out  in  Annex  IX  or  the  procedure set  out  in  Part  A  of  Annex  XI.  The  application  of  those  procedures  and  the  involvement  of  the  notified  body  shall  be limited  to  the  aspects  of  the  procedure  relating  to  ensuring  sterility  until  the  sterile  packaging  is  opened  or  damaged. The natural or legal person shall draw up a statement declaring that sterilisation has been carried out in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
- 4. Where the system or procedure pack incorporates devices which do not bear  the CE marking or  where the chosen combination  of  devices  is  not  compatible  in  view  of  their  original  intended  purpose,  or  where  the  sterilisation  has  not been  carried  out  in  accordance  with  the  manufacturer's  instructions,  the  system  or  procedure  pack  shall  be  treated  as a  device  in  its  own  right  and  shall  be  subject  to  the  relevant  conformity  assessment  procedure  pursuant  to  Article  52. The natural or legal person shall assume the obligations incumbent on manufacturers. - 5. The  systems  or  procedure  packs  referred  to  in  paragraph  1  of  this  Article  shall  not  themselves  bear  an  additional CE  marking  but  they  shall  bear  the  name,  registered  trade  name  or  registered  trade  mark  of  the  person  referred  to  in paragraphs  1  and  3  of  this  Article  as  well  as  the  address  at  which  that  person  can  be  contacted,  so  that  the  person's location  can  be  established.  Systems  or  procedure  packs  shall  be  accompanied  by  the  information  referred  to  in Section  23  of  Annex  I.  The  statement  referred  to  in  paragraph  2  of  this  Article  shall  be  kept  at  the  disposal  of  the competent authorities,  after  the  system or  procedure  pack has  been put  together,  for  the  period  that  is  applicable  under Article 10(8) to the devices that have been combined. Where those periods differ, the longest period shall apply.
## Article 23
## Parts and components
- 1. Any  natural  or  legal  person  who  makes  available  on  the  market  an  item  specifically  intended  to  replace  an identical  or  similar  integral  part  or  component  of  a  device  that  is  defective  or  worn  in  order  to  maintain  or  restore  the function  of  the  device  without  changing  its  performance  or  safety  characteristics  or  its  intended  purpose,  shall  ensure that  the  item  does  not  adversely  affect  the  safety  and  performance  of  the  device.  Supporting  evidence  shall  be  kept available for  the competent authorities of the Member States.
- 2. 