Moreover,  expert  panels  should  fulfil  the  tasks  of  providing  an  opinion  on  clinical  evaluation assessment reports of notified bodies in the case of certain high-risk devices.
- (84) Closer  coordination  between  national  competent  authorities  through  information  exchange  and  coordinated assessments  under  the  direction  of  a  coordinating  authority  is  essential  for  ensuring  a  consistently  high  level  of health  and  safety  protection  within  the  internal  market,  in  particular  in  the  areas  of  clinical  investigations  and vigilance.  The  principle  of  coordinated  exchange  and  assessment  should  also  apply  across  other  authority activities  described  in  this  Regulation,  such as  the  designation  of  notified bodies  and  should  be  encouraged  in the area  of  market  surveillance  of  devices.  Joint  working,  coordination  and  communication  of  activities  should  also lead to more efficient use of resources and expertise at national level.
- (85) The  Commission  should  provide  scientific, technical and  corresponding  logistical support  to  coordinating national authorities and ensure that the regulatory system for devices is effectively and uniformly implemented at Union level based on sound scientific evidence.
- (86) The  Union  and,  where  appropriate,  the  Member  States  should  actively  participate  in  international  regulatory cooperation  in  the  field  of  medical  devices  to  facilitate  the  exchange  of  safety-related  information  regarding medical  devices  and  to  foster  the  further  development  of  international  regulatory  guidelines  that  promote  the adoption in other jurisdictions of regulations that lead to a level of health and safety protection equivalent to that set by this Regulation.
- (87) Member  States should take all necessary measures to ensure that the provisions of this Regulation are implemented, including by laying down effective, proportionate and dissuasive penalties for  their infringement.
- (88) Whilst  this  Regulation  should  not  affect  the  right  of  Member  States  to  levy  fees  for  activities  at  national  level, Member  States  should,  in  order  to  ensure  transparency,  inform  the  Commission  and  the  other  Member  States before  they  decide  on  the  level  and  structure  of  such  fees.  In  order  to  further  ensure  transparency,  the  structure and level of  the fees should be publicly available on request.
- (89) This  Regulation  respects  the  fundamental  rights  and  observes  the  principles  recognised  in  particular  by  the Charter and in particular human dignity, the integrity of  the person, the protection of personal data, the freedom of  art  and  science,  the  freedom  to  conduct  business  and  the  right  to  property.  This  Regulation  should  be  applied by the Member States in accordance with those rights and principles.
