Where  the  importer  considers  or  has  reason  to  believe that  the  device  presents  a  serious  risk  or  is  a  falsified  device,  it  shall  also  inform  the  competent  authority  of  the Member State in which the importer is established.
- 3. Importers shall  indicate  on  the  device  or  on  its  packaging  or  in  a  document  accompanying  the  device  their  name, registered  trade  name  or  registered  trade  mark,  their  registered  place  of  business  and  the  address  at  which  they  can  be contacted,  so  that  their  location  can  be  established.  They  shall  ensure  that  any  additional  label  does  not  obscure  any information on the label provided by the manufacturer.
- 4. Importers shall verify that the device is registered in the electronic system in accordance with Article 29. Importers shall add their details to the registration in accordance with Article 31.
- 5. Importers  shall  ensure  that,  while  a  device  is  under  their  responsibility,  storage  or  transport  conditions  do  not jeopardise  its  compliance  with  the  general  safety  and  performance  requirements  set  out  in  Annex  I  and  shall  comply with the conditions set by the manufacturer, where available.
- 6. Importers  shall  keep  a  register  of  complaints,  of  non-conforming  devices  and  of  recalls  and  withdrawals,  and provide  the  manufacturer,  authorised  representative  and  distributors  with  any  information  requested  by  them,  in  order to allow them to investigate complaints.
- 7. Importers  who  consider  or  have  reason  to  believe  that  a  device  which  they  have  placed  on  the  market  is  not  in conformity  with  this  Regulation  shall  immediately  inform  the  manufacturer  and  its  authorised  representative.  Importers shall  co-operate  with  the  manufacturer,  the  manufacturer's  authorised  representative  and  the  competent  authorities  to ensure  that  the  necessary corrective  action  to bring  that  device  into  conformity,  to withdraw or  recall  it  is  taken.  Where the  device  presents  a  serious  risk,  they  shall  also  immediately  inform  the  competent  authorities  of  the  Member  States  in which  they  made  the  device  available  and,  if  applicable,  the  notified  body  that  issued  a  certificate  in  accordance  with Article  56  for  the  device  in  question,  giving  details,  in  particular,  of  the  non-compliance  and  of  any  corrective  action taken.
- 8. Importers  who  have  received  complaints  or reports from  healthcare  professionals, patients or users  about suspected incidents related to a device which they have placed on the market shall immediately forward this information to the manufacturer and its authorised representative.
- 9. Importers shall, for  the period referred to in Article 10(8), keep a copy of  the EU declaration of conformity and, if applicable,  a  copy  of  any  relevant  certificate,  including  any  amendments  and  supplements,  issued  in  accordance  with Article 56.
- 10. Importers  shall  cooperate  with  competent  authorities,  at  the  latters'  request,  on  any  action  taken  to  eliminate  or, if  that  is  not  possible,  mitigate  the  risks  posed  by  devices  which  they  have  placed  on  the  market.  Importers,  upon request  by  a  competent  authority  of  the  Member  State  in  which  the  importer  has  its  registered  place  of  business,  shall provide samples of the device free of charge or, where that is impracticable, grant access to the device.
## Article 14
## General obligations of distributors
- 1. When  making  a  device  available  on  the  market,  distributors  shall,  in  the  context  of  their  activities,  act  with  due care in relation to the requirements applicable.
- 2. Before  making  a  device  available  on  the  market,  distributors  shall  verify  that  all  of  the  following  requirements  are met:
- (a)   the  device has been CE marked and that the EU declaration of conformity of the device has been drawn up;
- (b)   the  device is accompanied by the information to be supplied by the manufacturer in accordance with Article 10(11);
- (c)   for  imported devices, the importer has complied with the requirements set out in Article 13(3);
- (d)   that,  where applicable, a UDI has been assigned by the manufacturer.
In  order  to  meet  the  requirements  referred  to  in  points  (a),  (b)  and  (d)  of  the  first  subparagraph  the  distributor  may apply a sampling method that is representative of the devices supplied by that distributor. Where a  distributor  considers  or  has  reason  to  believe  that  a  device  is  not  in  conformity  with  the  requirements  of  this Regulation,  it  shall  not  make  the  device  available  on  the  market  until  it  has  been  brought  into  conformity,  and  shall inform  the  manufacturer  and,  where  applicable,  the  manufacturer's  authorised  representative,  and  the  importer.  Where the  distributor  considers  or  has  reason  to  believe  that  the  device  presents  a  serious  risk  or  is  a  falsified  device,  it  shall also inform the competent authority of the Member State in which it is established.
- 3. Distributors shall ensure that, while the device is under  their  responsibility, storage or  transport conditions comply with the conditions set by the manufacturer.
- 4. Distributors that consider or have reason to believe that a device which they have made available on the market is not  in  conformity  with  this  Regulation  shall  immediately  inform  the  manufacturer  and,  where  applicable,  the  manufac­ turer's  authorised  representative  and  the  importer.  Distributors  shall  co-operate  with  the  manufacturer  and,  where applicable, the manufacturer's authorised representative, and the importer, and with competent authorities to ensure that the  necessary corrective  action  to  bring  that  device  into  conformity,  to withdraw or  to  recall  it,  as  appropriate,  is  taken. Where the distributor considers or has reason to believe that the device  presents a serious risk,  it  shall  also  immediately inform  the  competent  authorities  of  the  Member  States  in  which  it  made  the  device  available,  giving  details,  in particular, of  the non-compliance and of any corrective action taken.
- 5. Distributors  that  have  received  complaints  or  reports  from  healthcare  professionals,  patients  or  users  about suspected  incidents  related  to  a  device  they  have  made  available,  shall  immediately  forward  this  information  to  the manufacturer  and,  where  applicable,  the  manufacturer's  authorised  representative,  and  the  importer.  They  shall  keep a  register  of  complaints,  of  non-conforming  devices  and  of  recalls  and  withdrawals,  and  keep  the  manufacturer  and, where available, the authorised representative and the importer informed of such monitoring and provide them with any information upon their request.
- 6. Distributors  shall,  upon  request  by  a  competent  authority,  provide  it  with  all  the  information  and  documentation that is at their disposal and is necessary to demonstrate the conformity of a device.
Distributors shall be considered  to  have  fulfilled the obligation referred to in the  first  subparagraph  when  the manufacturer  or,  where  applicable,  the  authorised  representative  for the  device  in  question  provides  the  required information.  Distributors  shall  cooperate  with  competent  authorities,  at  their  request,  on  any  action  taken  to  eliminate the  risks  posed  by  devices  which  they  have  made  available  on  the  market.  Distributors,  upon  request  by  a  competent authority, shall provide free samples of the device or, where that is impracticable, grant access to the device.
## Article 15
## Person responsible for regulatory compliance
- 1. Manufacturers  shall have  available within their organisation at least  one  person  responsible for regulatory compliance  who  possesses  the  requisite  expertise  in  the  field  of  medical  devices.  The  requisite  expertise  shall  be demonstrated by either of the following qualifications:
- (a)   a  diploma,  certificate  or  other  evidence  of  formal  qualification,  awarded  on  completion  of  a  university  degree  or  of a  course  of  study  recognised  as  equivalent  by  the  Member  State  concerned,  in  law,  medicine,  pharmacy,  engineering or  another  relevant  scientific  discipline,  and  at  least  one  year  of  professional  experience  in  regulatory  affairs  or  in quality management systems relating to medical devices;
- (b)   four  years  of  professional  experience  in  regulatory  affairs  or  in  quality  management  systems  relating  to  medical devices.
Without  prejudice  to  national  provisions  regarding  professional  qualifications,  manufacturers  of  custom-made  devices may demonstrate the requisite expertise referred to in the first subparagraph by having at least two years of professional experience within a relevant field of manufacturing.
- 2. Micro  and  small  enterprises  within  the  meaning  of  Commission  Recommendation  2003/361/EC  ( 1 )  shall  not  be required  to  have  the  person  responsible  for  regulatory  compliance  within  their  organisation  but  shall  have  such  person permanently and continuously at their disposal.
( 1 ) Commission Recommendation 2003/361/ΕC of 6 May 2003 concerning the definition of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (OJ L 124, , p. 36).
- 3. The person responsible for regulatory compliance shall at least be responsible for ensuring that:
- (a)   the  conformity  of  the  devices  is  appropriately  checked,  in  accordance  with  the  quality  management  system  under which the devices are manufactured, before a device is released;
- (b)   the  technical documentation and the EU declaration of conformity are drawn up and kept up-to-date;
- (c)   the  post-market surveillance obligations are complied with in accordance with Article 10(10);
- (d)   the  reporting obligations referred to in Articles 87 to 91 are fulfilled;
- (e)   in  the  case  of  investigational devices, the statement referred to in Section  of Chapter II of Annex XV is issued.
- 4. If  a  number of persons are jointly responsible for regulatory compliance in accordance with paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, their  respective areas of responsibility shall be stipulated in writing.
- 5. The person responsible for regulatory compliance shall suffer no disadvantage within the manufacturer's organisation  in  relation  to  the  proper  fulfilment of  his  or  her  duties,  regardless  of  whether  or  not  they  are  employees  of the organisation.
- 6. Authorised representatives shall have permanently and continuously at their disposal at least one person responsible  for  regulatory  compliance  who  possesses  the  requisite  expertise  regarding  the  regulatory  requirements  for medical devices in the Union. The requisite expertise shall be demonstrated by either of the following qualifications:
- (a)   a  diploma,  certificate  or  other  evidence  of  formal  qualification,  awarded  on  completion  of  a  university  degree  or  of a  course  of  study  recognised  as  equivalent  by  the  Member  State  concerned,  in  law,  medicine,  pharmacy,  engineering or  another  relevant  scientific  discipline,  and  at  least  one  year  of  professional  experience  in  regulatory  affairs  or  in quality management systems relating to medical devices;
- (b)   four  years  of  professional  experience  in  regulatory  affairs  or  in  quality  management  systems  relating  to  medical devices.
## Article 16
## Cases in which obligations of manufacturers apply to importers, distributors or other persons
- 1. A distributor,  importer  or  other  natural  or  legal  person  shall  assume  the  obligations  incumbent  on  manufacturers if  it  does  any of  the following:
- (a)   makes  available  on  the  market  a  device  under  its  name,  registered  trade  name  or  registered  trade  mark,  except  in cases  where  a  distributor  or  importer  enters  into  an  agreement  with  a  manufacturer  whereby  the  manufacturer  is identified  as  such  on  the  label  and  is  responsible  for  meeting  the  requirements  placed  on  manufacturers  in  this Regulation;
- (b)   changes the intended purpose of a device already placed on the market or put into service;
- (c)   modifies a device already placed on the market or put into service in such a way that compliance with the applicable requirements may be affected.
