Since  vulnerabilities  are  often  discovered  and  disclosed  by  third parties,  the  manufacturer  or  provider  of  ICT  products  or  ICT  services  should  also  put  in  place  the  necessary procedures to receive vulnerability  information  from third  parties.  In  that  regard,  international  standards  ISO/IEC 30111 and ISO/IEC 29147 provide guidance on vulnerability handling and vulnerability disclosure. Strengthening the  coordination  between reporting natural and legal persons and manufacturers or  providers of ICT products or ICT  services  is  particularly  important  for  the  purpose  of  facilitating  the  voluntary  framework  of  vulnerability disclosure.  Coordinated  vulnerability  disclosure  specifies  a  structured  process  through  which  vulnerabilities  are reported  to  the  manufacturer  or  provider  of  the  potentially  vulnerable  ICT  products  or  ICT services  in  a  manner allowing it to diagnose and remedy the vulnerability before detailed vulnerability information is disclosed to third parties  or  to  the  public.  Coordinated  vulnerability  disclosure  should  also  include  coordination  between  the reporting  natural  or  legal  person  and  the  manufacturer  or  provider  of  the  potentially  vulnerable  ICT  products  or ICT services as regards the timing of remediation and publication of vulnerabilities.
- (59) The Commission, ENISA and the Member States should continue to foster alignments with international standards and existing industry best practices in the area of cybersecurity risk management, for example in the areas of supply chain security assessments, information sharing and vulnerability disclosure.
- (60) Member States, in cooperation with ENISA, should take measures to facilitate coordinated vulnerability disclosure by establishing a relevant national policy. As part of their national policy, Member States should aim to address, to the extent  possible,  the  challenges  faced  by  vulnerability  researchers,  including  their  potential  exposure  to  criminal liability,  in  accordance  with  national  law.  Given  that  natural  and  legal  persons  researching  vulnerabilities  could  in some Member States be exposed to criminal and civil liability, Member States are encouraged to adopt guidelines as regards  the  non-prosecution  of  information  security  researchers  and  an  exemption  from  civil  liability  for  their activities.
- (61) Member States should designate  one  of  its  CSIRTs  as  a  coordinator,  acting  as  a  trusted  intermediary  between  the reporting  natural  or  legal  persons  and  the  manufacturers  or  providers  of  ICT  products  or  ICT services,  which  are likely to be affected by the vulnerability, where necessary. The tasks of the CSIRT designated as coordinator should include  identifying  and  contacting  the  entities  concerned,  assisting  the  natural  or  legal  persons  reporting  a vulnerability, negotiating disclosure timelines and managing vulnerabilities that affect multiple entities (multi-party coordinated vulnerability disclosure). Where the reported vulnerability could have significant impact on entities in more than one Member State, the CSIRTs designated as coordinators should cooperate within the CSIRTs network, where appropriate.
- (62) Access to correct and timely information about vulnerabilities affecting ICT products and ICT services contributes to an enhanced cybersecurity risk management. Sources of publicly available information about vulnerabilities are an important  tool  for  the  entities  and  for  the  users  of  their  services,  but  also  for  the  competent  authorities  and  the CSIRTs.  For  that  reason,  ENISA  should  establish  a  European  vulnerability  database  where  entities,  regardless  of whether they fall within the scope of this Directive, and their suppliers of network and information systems, as well as  the  competent  authorities  and  the  CSIRTs,  can  disclose  and  register,  on  a  voluntary  basis,  publicly  known vulnerabilities for  the purpose of allowing users to take appropriate mitigating measures. The aim of that database is  to  address  the  unique  challenges  posed  by  risks  to  Union  entities.  Furthermore,  ENISA  should  establish  an appropriate  procedure  regarding  the  publication  process  in  order  to  give  entities  the  time  to  take  mitigating measures  as  regards  their  vulnerabilities  and  employ  state-of-the-art  cybersecurity  risk-management  measures  as well as machine-readable datasets and corresponding interfaces. To encourage  a culture of disclosure of vulnerabilities, disclosure should have no detrimental effects on the reporting natural or legal person.
- (63) Although similar vulnerability registries or databases exist, they are hosted and maintained by entities which are not established  in  the  Union.  A  European  vulnerability  database  maintained  by  ENISA  would  provide  improved transparency  regarding  the  publication  process  before  the  vulnerability  is  publicly  disclosed,  and  resilience  in  the event of a disruption or an interruption of the provision of similar services. In order, to the extent possible, to avoid a  duplication  of  efforts  and  to  seek  complementarity,  ENISA  should  explore  the  possibility  of  entering  into structured cooperation agreements with similar registries or databases that fall under  third-country jurisdiction. In particular,  ENISA  should  explore  the  possibility  of  close  cooperation  with  the  operators  of  the  Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) system.
- (64) The Cooperation Group should support and facilitate strategic cooperation and the exchange of information, as well as  strengthen  trust  and  confidence  among  Member  States.  The  Cooperation  Group  should  establish  a  work programme every two years. The work programme should include the actions to be undertaken by the Cooperation Group  to  implement  its  objectives  and  tasks.  The  timeframe  for  the  establishment  of  the  first  work  programme under this Directive should be aligned with the timeframe of the last work programme established under Directive (EU) 2016/1148 in order to avoid potential disruptions in the work of the Cooperation Group.
- (65) When  developing  guidance  documents,  the  Cooperation  Group  should  consistently  map  national  solutions  and experiences, assess the impact of Cooperation Group deliverables on national approaches, discuss implementation challenges  and  formulate  specific  recommendations,  in  particular  as  regards  facilitating  an  alignment  of  the transposition of this Directive among Member States, to be addressed through a better implementation of existing rules.  The  Cooperation  Group  could  also  map  the  national  solutions  in  order  to  promote  compatibility  of cybersecurity solutions applied to each specific sector across the Union. This is particularly relevant to sectors that have an international or cross-border nature.
- (66) The Cooperation Group should remain a flexible forum and be able to react to changing and new policy priorities and challenges while taking into account the availability of resources. It could organise regular joint meetings with relevant private stakeholders from across the Union to discuss activities carried out by the Cooperation Group and gather  data  and  input  on  emerging  policy  challenges.  Additionally,  the  Cooperation  Group  should  carry  out  a regular  assessment  of  the  state  of  play  of  cyber  threats  or  incidents,  such  as  ransomware.  In  order  to  enhance cooperation  at  Union  level,  the  Cooperation  Group  should  consider  inviting  relevant  Union  institutions,  bodies, offices and agencies involved in cybersecurity policy, such as the European Parliament, Europol, the European Data Protection Board, the European Union Aviation Safety Agency, established by Regulation (EU) 2018/1139, and the European  Union  Agency  for  Space  Programme,  established  by  Regulation  (EU)  2021/696  of  the  European Parliament and the Council ( 14 ), to participate in its work.
- (67) The competent authorities and the CSIRTs should be able to participate in exchange schemes for officials from other Member  States,  within  a  specific  framework  and,  where  applicable,  subject  to  the  required  security  clearance  of officials  participating  in  such  exchange  schemes,  in  order  to  improve  cooperation  and  strengthen  trust  among Member  States.  The  competent  authorities  should  take  the  necessary  measures  to  enable  officials  from  other Member States to play an effective role in the activities of the host competent authority or the host CSIRT.
- (68) Member States should contribute to the establishment of the EU Cybersecurity Crisis Response Framework as set out in Commission Recommendation (EU) 2017/1584 ( 15 ) through the existing cooperation networks, in particular the European  cyber  crisis  liaison  organisation  network  (EU-CyCLONe),  the  CSIRTs  network  and  the  Cooperation Group.  EU-CyCLONe  and  the  CSIRTs  network  should  cooperate  on  the  basis  of  procedural  arrangements  that specify the details of that cooperation and avoid any duplication of tasks. EU-CyCLONe's rules of procedure should further specify the arrangements through which that network should function, including the network's roles, means of  cooperation, interactions with other  relevant actors and templates for  information sharing, as well as means of communication. For crisis  management  at  Union  level,  relevant  parties  should  rely on  the  EU  Integrated  Political Crisis Response arrangements under Council Implementing Decision (EU) 2018/1993 ( 16 ) (IPCR arrangements). The Commission  should  use  the  ARGUS  high-level  cross-sectoral  crisis  coordination  process  for  that  purpose.  If  the crisis  entails  an  important  external  or  Common  Security  and  Defence  Policy  dimension,  the  European  External Action Service Crisis Response Mechanism should be activated.
- (69) In  accordance  with  the  Annex  to  Recommendation  (EU)  2017/1584,  a  large-scale  cybersecurity  incident  should mean  an  incident  which  causes  a  level  of  disruption  that  exceeds  a  Member  State's  capacity  to  respond  to  it  or which  has  a  significant  impact  on  at  least  two  Member  States.  Depending  on  their  cause  and  impact,  large-scale cybersecurity  incidents  may escalate  and  turn  into  fully-fledged  crises  not  allowing  the  proper  functioning  of  the internal market or posing serious public security and safety risks for entities or citizens in several Member States or the Union as a whole. Given the wide-ranging scope and, in most cases, the cross-border nature of such incidents, Member  States  and  the  relevant  Union  institutions,  bodies,  offices  and  agencies  should  cooperate  at  technical, operational and political level to properly coordinate the response across the Union.
- (70) Large-scale  cybersecurity  incidents  and  crises  at  Union  level  require  coordinated  action  to  ensure  a  rapid  and effective  response  because  of  the  high  degree  of  interdependence  between  sectors  and  Member  States.  The availability of  cyber-resilient  network  and  information  systems  and  the  availability,  confidentiality  and  integrity of data are vital for the security of the Union and for the protection of its citizens, businesses and institutions against incidents and cyber threats, as well as for enhancing the trust of individuals and organisations in the Union's ability to promote and protect a global, open, free, stable and secure cyberspace grounded in human rights, fundamental freedoms, democracy and the rule of law.
( 14 ) Regulation (EU) 2021/696 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 April 2021 establishing the Union Space Programme and the European Union Agency for  the Space Programme and repealing Regulations (EU) No 912/2010, (EU) No 1285/2013 and (EU) No 377/2014 and Decision No 541/2014/EU (OJ L 170, , p. 69).
( 15 ) Commission Recommendation (EU) 2017/1584 of 13 September 2017 on coordinated response to large-scale cybersecurity incidents and crises (OJ L 239, , p. 36).
( 16 ) Council Implementing Decision (EU) 2018/1993 of 11 December 2018 on the EU Integrated Political Crisis Response Arrangements (OJ L 320, , p. 28). - (71) EU-CyCLONe  should  work  as  an  intermediary  between  the  technical  and  political  level  during  large-scale cybersecurity  incidents  and  crises  and  should  enhance  cooperation  at  operational  level  and  support  decisionmaking at political level. In cooperation with the Commission, having regard to the Commission's competence in the  area  of  crisis  management,  EU-CyCLONe  should  build  on  the  CSIRTs  network  findings  and  use  its  own capabilities to create impact analysis of large-scale cybersecurity incidents and crises.
- (72) Cyberattacks  are  of  a  cross-border  nature,  and  a  significant  incident  can  disrupt  and  damage  critical  information infrastructures on  which  the smooth  functioning of the internal market  depends.  Recommendation  (EU) 2017/1584  addresses  the  role  of  all  relevant  actors.  Furthermore,  the  Commission  is  responsible,  within  the framework of the Union Civil Protection Mechanism, established by Decision No 1313/2013/EU of the European Parliament  and  of  the  Council ( 17 ),  for  general  preparedness  actions  including  managing  the  Emergency  Response Coordination  Centre  and  the  Common  Emergency  Communication  and  Information  System,  maintaining  and further  developing  situational  awareness  and  analysis  capability,  and  establishing  and  managing  the  capability  to mobilise and dispatch expert teams in the event of a request for assistance from a Member State or  third country. The Commission is also responsible for providing analytical reports for the IPCR arrangements under Implementing Decision (EU) 2018/1993, including in relation to cybersecurity situational awareness and preparedness, as well as for  situational  awareness  and  crisis  response  in  the  areas  of  agriculture,  adverse  weather  conditions,  conflict mapping  and  forecasts, early warning systems for natural disasters, health emergencies, infection disease surveillance, plant health, chemical incidents, food and feed safety, animal health, migration, customs, nuclear and radiological emergencies, and energy.
- (73) The Union can, where appropriate, conclude international agreements, in accordance with Article 218 TFEU, with third countries or international organisations, allowing and organising their participation in particular activities of the  Cooperation  Group,  the  CSIRTs  network  and  EU-CyCLONe.  Such  agreements  should  ensure  the  Union's interests and the adequate protection of data. This should not preclude the right of Member States to cooperate with third  countries  on  management  of  vulnerabilities  and  cybersecurity  risk  management,  facilitating  reporting  and general information sharing in accordance with Union law.
- (74) In  order  to  facilitate  the  effective  implementation  of  this  Directive  with  regard,  inter  alia,  to  the  management  of vulnerabilities,  cybersecurity  risk-management  measures,  reporting  obligations  and  cybersecurity  informationsharing  arrangements,  Member  States  can  cooperate  with  third  countries  and  undertake  activities  that  are considered  to  be  appropriate  for  that  purpose,  including  information  exchange  on  cyber  threats,  incidents, vulnerabilities, tools and methods, tactics, techniques and procedures, cybersecurity crisis management preparedness and exercises, training, trust building and structured information-sharing arrangements.
- (75) Peer reviews should be introduced to help learn from shared experiences, strengthen mutual trust and achieve a high common level of cybersecurity. Peer reviews can lead to valuable insights and recommendations strengthening the overall cybersecurity capabilities, creating another functional path for  the sharing of best practices across Member States  and  contributing  to  enhance  the  Member  States'  levels  of  maturity  in  cybersecurity.  Furthermore,  peer reviews  should  take  account  of  the  results  of  similar  mechanisms,  such  as  the  peer-review  system  of  the  CSIRTs network,  and  should  add  value  and  avoid  duplication.  The  implementation  of  peer  reviews  should  be  without prejudice to Union or national law on the protection of confidential or classified information.
- (76) The Cooperation Group should establish a self-assessment methodology for Member States, aiming to cover factors such as the level of implementation of the cybersecurity risk-management measures and reporting obligations, the level  of  capabilities  and  the  effectiveness  of  the  exercise  of  the  tasks  of  the  competent  authorities,  the  operational capabilities  of  the  CSIRTs,  the  level  of  implementation  of  mutual  assistance,  the  level  of  implementation  of  the cybersecurity information-sharing arrangements, or specific issues of cross-border or cross-sector  nature. Member States should be encouraged to carry out self-assessments on a regular basis, and to present and discuss the results of their self-assessment within the Cooperation Group.
( 17 ) Decision  No  1313/2013/EU  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  17  December  2013  on  a  Union  Civil  Protection Mechanism (OJ L 347, , p. 924). - (77) Responsibility for ensuring the security of network and information system lies, to a great extent, with essential and important  entities. A  culture of risk management,  involving  risk assessments and  the  implementation  of cybersecurity risk-management measures appropriate to the risks faced, should be promoted and developed.
- (78) Cybersecurity  risk-management  measures  should  take  into  account  the  degree  of  dependence  of  the  essential  or important entity on  network  and  information  systems and  include  measures  to identify  any  risks  of  incidents,  to prevent,  detect,  respond  to  and  recover  from  incidents  and  to  mitigate  their  impact.  The  security of  network  and information  systems  should  include  the  security  of  stored,  transmitted  and  processed  data.  Cybersecurity  riskmanagement measures should provide for systemic analysis, taking into account the human factor, in order to have a complete picture of the security of the network and information system.
- (79) As  threats  to  the  security  of  network  and  information  systems  can  have  different  origins,  cybersecurity  riskmanagement  measures  should  be  based  on  an  all-hazards  approach,  which  aims  to  protect  network  and information  systems  and  the  physical  environment  of  those  systems  from  events  such  as  theft,  fire,  flood, telecommunication  or  power  failures,  or  unauthorised  physical  access  and  damage  to,  and  interference  with,  an essential  or  important  entity's  information  and  information  processing  facilities,  which  could  compromise  the availability,  authenticity,  integrity  or  confidentiality  of  stored,  transmitted  or  processed  data  or  of  the  services offered  by,  or  accessible  via,  network  and  information  systems.  The  cybersecurity  risk-management  measures should  therefore  also  address  the  physical  and  environmental  security  of  network  and  information  systems  by including  measures  to  protect  such  systems  from  system  failures,  human  error,  malicious  acts  or natural phenomena, in line with European and international standards, such as those included in the ISO/IEC 27000 series. In that regard, essential and important entities should, as part of their cybersecurity risk-management measures, also address human resources security and have in place appropriate access control policies. Those measures should be consistent with Directive (EU) 2022/2557.
- (80) For the purpose of demonstrating compliance with cybersecurity risk-management measures and in the absence of appropriate European cybersecurity certification schemes adopted in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2019/881 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 18 ), Member States should, in consultation with the Cooperation Group and  the  European  Cybersecurity  Certification  Group,  promote  the  use  of  relevant  European  and  international standards by essential and important entities or may require entities to use certified ICT products, ICT services and ICT processes.
- (81) In  order  to  avoid  imposing  a  disproportionate  financial  and  administrative  burden  on  essential  and  important entities,  the  cybersecurity  risk-management  measures  should  be  proportionate  to  the  risks  posed  to  the  network and information system concerned, taking into account the state-of-the-art of such measures, and, where applicable, relevant European and international standards, as well as the cost for their implementation.
- (82) Cybersecurity  risk-management  measures  should  be  proportionate  to  the  degree  of  the  essential  or  important entity's exposure to risks and to the societal and economic impact that an incident would have. When establishing cybersecurity risk-management measures adapted to essential and important entities, due account should be taken of  the  divergent  risk  exposure  of  essential  and  important  entities,  such  as  the  criticality  of  the  entity,  the  risks, including  societal  risks,  to  which  it  is  exposed,  the  entity's  size  and  the  likelihood  of  occurrence  of  incidents  and their severity, including their societal and economic impact.
( 18 ) Regulation (EU) 2019/881 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 April 2019 on ENISA (the European Union Agency for Cybersecurity) and on information and communications technology cybersecurity certification and repealing Regulation (EU) No 526/2013 (Cybersecurity Act) (OJ L 151, , p. 15). - (83) Essential and important entities should ensure the security of the network and information systems which they use in  their  activities.  Those  systems are  primarily  private network and information systems managed by the essential and  important  entities'  internal  IT  staff  or  the  security  of  which  has  been  outsourced.  The  cybersecurity  riskmanagement measures and reporting obligations laid down in this Directive should apply to the relevant essential and  important  entities  regardless  of  whether  those  entities  maintain  their  network  and  information  systems internally or outsource the maintenance thereof.
- (84) Taking account of their cross-border nature, DNS service providers, TLD name registries, cloud computing service providers,  data  centre  service  providers,  content  delivery  network  providers,  managed  service  providers,  managed security  service  providers,  providers  of  online  marketplaces,  of  online  search  engines  and  of  social  networking services platforms, and trust service providers should be subject to a high degree of harmonisation at Union level. The implementation of cybersecurity risk-management measures with regard to those entities should therefore be facilitated by an implementing act.
- (85) Addressing risks stemming from an entity's supply chain and its relationship with its suppliers, such as providers of data  storage  and  processing  services  or  managed  security  service  providers  and  software  editors,  is  particularly important  given  the  prevalence  of  incidents  where  entities  have  been  the  victim  of  cyberattacks  and  where malicious  perpetrators  were  able  to  compromise  the  security  of  an  entity's  network  and  information  systems  by exploiting  vulnerabilities  affecting  third-party  products  and  services.  Essential  and  important  entities  should therefore assess and take into account the overall quality and resilience of products and services, the cybersecurity risk-management  measures  embedded  in  them,  and  the  cybersecurity  practices  of  their  suppliers  and  service providers, including their secure development procedures. Essential and important entities should in particular be encouraged to incorporate cybersecurity risk-management measures into contractual arrangements with their direct suppliers  and  service  providers.  Those  entities  could  consider  risks  stemming  from  other  levels  of  suppliers  and service providers.
- (86) Among service providers, managed security service providers in areas such as incident response, penetration testing, security  audits  and  consultancy  play  a  particularly  important  role  in  assisting  entities  in  their  efforts  to  prevent, detect,  respond  to  or  recover  from  incidents.  Managed  security  service  providers  have  however  also  themselves been the target of cyberattacks and, because of their close integration in the operations of entities pose a particular risk.  Essential  and  important  entities  should  therefore  exercise  increased  diligence  in  selecting  a  managed  security service provider.
- (87) The competent authorities, in the context of  their  supervisory  tasks,  may  also  benefit  from  cybersecurity  services such as security audits, penetration testing or incident responses.
- (88) Essential and important entities should also address risks stemming from their  interactions and relationships with other  stakeholders  within  a  broader  ecosystem,  including  with  regard  to  countering  industrial  espionage  and protecting  trade  secrets.  In  particular,  those  entities  should  take  appropriate  measures  to  ensure  that  their cooperation with academic and research institutions takes place in line with their cybersecurity policies and follows good practices as regards secure access and dissemination of information in general and the protection of intellectual property in particular. Similarly, given the importance and value of data for the activities of essential and important entities, when relying on data transformation and data analytics services from third parties, those entities should take all appropriate cybersecurity risk-management measures.
- (89) Essential  and  important  entities  should  adopt  a  wide  range  of  basic  cyber  hygiene  practices,  such  as  zero-trust principles, software updates, device configuration, network segmentation, identity and access management or user awareness,  organise  training  for  their  staff  and  raise  awareness  concerning  cyber  threats,  phishing  or  social engineering techniques. 