This comes on top of the requirement under Article 14 AI Act for human oversight. Checks could relate for example to the question whether a given person has been at a different place or also whether there are other reasons for that the person cannot be the person searched.
Requirements of Article 14 AI Act for Human Oversight
231 The supervisory authorities should also have the powers to do this post fact check and control. See Article 5(5) AI Act.
(408) The use of real-time RBI that is permitted because it pursues one of the objectives listed in Article 5(1)(h) and complies with Articles 5(2)-(6) AI Act still falls under the rules for high-risk systems. In accordance with Article 14 AI Act, high-risk AI systems 'shall be designed and developed in such a way, including with appropriate human-machine interface  tools,  that  they  can  be  effectively  overseen  by  natural  persons  during  the period in which they are in use.' Pursuant to Article 14(5) AI Act, no action or decision may  be  taken  by  the  deployer  on  the  basis  of  the  identification  resulting  from  the system, 'unless that identification has been separately verified and confirmed by at least two natural persons with the necessary competence, training and authority' or unless 'Union or national law considers the application of this requirement to be disproportionate'. Article 4 AI Act prescribes AI literacy measures for providers and users of AI systems to ensure 'a sufficient level of AI literacy of their staff and other persons dealing with the operation and use of AI systems' and considering the persons on whom the systems are to be used.
(409) As  stated  by  the  EDPB  in  the  data  protection  context,  for  human  oversight  to  be effective  it  is  crucial  'to  enable  the  person  to  understand  the  (in  that  case  facial recognition) system and its limits as well as to interpret its results properly.  It is also necessary  to  establish  a  workplace  and  organisation  that  counteracts  the  effects  of automation bias, and avoids fostering the uncritical acceptance of the results e.g. by time  pressure,  burdensome  procedures,  potential  detrimental  career  effects  etc.' 232 Similar considerations may apply in the context of the AI Act.
## . Notification to the authorities of each use of 'real-time' remote biometric identification systems in publicly accessible spaces for law enforcement
## Article 5(4) AI Act provides:
Without  prejudice  to  paragraph  3,  each  use  of  a  'real-time'  remote  biometric identification system in publicly accessible spaces for law enforcement purposes shall be notified to the relevant market surveillance authority and the national data protection authority  in  accordance  with  the  national  rules  referred  to  in  paragraph  5.  The notification shall, as a minimum, contain the information specified under paragraph 6 and shall not include sensitive operational data.
(410) Each use of an RBI system pursuing one of the objectives listed in Article 5(1)(h)(i)(iii)  AI  Act  must  be  notified  to  the  relevant  market  surveillance  authority  and  the national data protection authority. Notification must take place after each use in order to be able to report about the number of authorisations and their result. The notification does not need to include sensitive operational data. According to Article 3 (38) AI Act, 'sensitive operational data' means operational data related to law enforcement activities (prevention, detection, investigation or prosecution of criminal offences), the disclosure of which could jeopardise the integrity of criminal proceedings.
232  EDPB, Guidelines 05/2022 on the use of facial recognition technology in the area of law enforcement Version , 26 April 2023, p. 22.
(411) For the details on the reporting requirement, see section  below.
## . Need for national laws within the limits of the AI Act exceptions
## . Principle: national law required to provide the legal basis for the authorisation for all or some of the exceptions
(412) National laws are required for operationalising the use of 'real-time' RBI systems in publicly  accessible  spaces  for  the  purposes  of  law  enforcement.  At  the  same  time, Article 5(5) AI Act provides that Member States remain free to decide whether to adopt such national laws. If a national law authorising the use of real-time RBI is adopted, the AI  Act  specifies  the  substantive  elements  which  the  national  laws  must  contain  to comply with the requirements laid down in the AI Act.
## Article 5(5) AI Act
A Member State may decide to provide for the possibility to fully or partially authorise the  use  of  'real-time'  remote  biometric  identification  systems  in  publicly  accessible spaces for the purposes of law enforcement within the limits and under the conditions listed in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, point (h), and paragraphs 2 and 3. Member States concerned shall lay down in their national law the necessary detailed rules for the request, issuance and exercise of, as well as supervision and reporting relating to, the authorisations referred to in paragraph 3. Those rules shall also specify in respect of which of the objectives listed in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, point (h), including which  of  the  criminal  offences  referred  to  in  point  (h)(iii)  thereof,  the  competent authorities may be authorised to use those systems for the purposes of law enforcement. Member States shall notify those rules to the Commission at the latest 30 days following the adoption thereof. Member States may introduce, in accordance with Union law, more restrictive laws on the use of remote biometric identification systems.
## . National law shall respect the limits and conditions of Article 5(1)(h) AI Act
(413) Since  the  use  of  'real-time'  RBI  systems  in  publicly  accessible  spaces  for  law enforcement purposes is considered an interference with fundamental rights, Article 5(5) AI Act provides that such use shall be established by national law in the Member States. Those national laws provide the legal basis for the use of such systems.
(414) National laws shall not exceed the limits set by Article 5(1)(h) AI Act and shall respect all further related conditions set forth in the AI Act. That implies that the Member States may  not  expand  the  objectives  for  which  real-time  RBI  may  be  used  in  publicly accessible  spaces  for  law  enforcement  purposes  beyond  those  listed  in  Article 5(1)(h)(i)-(iii) AI Act 233 .
233 See judgment of the Court of Justice of 5 April 2022, Commissioner of An Garda Síochána , C-140/20, ECLI:EU:C:2022:258, paragraph 54: 'In order to satisfy the requirement of proportionality, the national legislation must lay down clear and precise rules governing the scope and application of the measure in question and imposing minimum safeguards.'
- (415) Member States shall notify their national laws to the Commission at the latest 30 days following the adoption thereof. Such notification does not provide a presumption of conformity of the Member States' law with the AI Act.  The AI Office, after receiving the notification, will send a confirmation of receipt. Prior to its adoption, Member States are  also  encouraged  to  send  a  preliminary  version  of  the  national  (or  regional)  law proposed to the AI Office. In any case, non-notification to the AI Office within the legal deadline of 30 days following the adoption set out in Article 5(5) may imply that the national  law  is  unenforceable  in  legal  proceedings,  as  has  been  held  in  different contexts. 