Note 2 to entry: Some organizations use other terms for these topic-specific policies.
Note 3 to entry: The topic-specific policies referred to in this document are related to information security.
EXAMPLE Topic-specific policy on access control ( ), topic-specific policy on clear desk and clear screen.
## 
## user
interested party () with access to the organization's information systems ()
EXAMPLE Personnel
(), customers, suppliers.
## 
## user endpoint device
endpoint device () used by users to access information processing services
Note  1  to  entry:  User  endpoint  device  can  refer  to  desktop  computers,  laptops,  smart  phones,  tablets,  thin clients, etc.
## 
## vulnerability
weakness of an asset () or control () that can be exploited by one or more threats ()
[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 27000:2018, ]
##  Abbreviated	terms
ABAC attribute-based access control
ACL
access control list
BIA
business impact analysis
BYOD
bring your own device
CAPTCHA completely automated public Turing test to tell computers and humans apart
CPU
central processing unit
DAC
discretionary access control
DNS domain name system
GPS global positioning system
IAM identity and access management
ICT information and communication technology
ID identifier
IDE integrated development environment
IDS intrusion detection system
IoT internet of things
IP internet protocol
IPS intrusion prevention system
IT information technology
ISMS information security management system
MAC mandatory access control
NTP network time protocol
PIA privacy impact assessment
PII personally identifiable information
| PIN    | personal identification number            |
|--------|-------------------------------------------|
| PKI    | public key infrastructure                 |
| PTP    | precision time protocol                   |
| RBAC   | role-based access control                 |
| RPO    | recovery point objective                  |
| RTO    | recovery time objective                   |
| SAST   | static application security testing       |
| SD     | secure digital                            |
| SDN    | software-defined networking               |
| SD-WAN | software-defined wide area networking     |
| SIEM   | security information and event management |
| SMS    | short message service                     |
| SQL    | structured query language                 |
| SSO    | single sign on                            |
| SWID   | software identification                   |
| UEBA   | user and entity behaviour analytics       |
| UPS    | uninterruptible power supply              |
| URL    | uniform resource locator                  |
| USB    | universal serial bus                      |
| VM     | virtual machine                           |
| VPN    | virtual private network                   |
WiFi wireless fidelity
## 4 Structure of this document
##  Clauses
This document is structured as follows:
- a) Organizational controls (Clause 5)
- b) People controls (Clause 6)
- c) Physical controls (Clause 7)
- d) Technological controls (Clause 8)
There are 2 informative annexes:
- -  Annex A - Using attributes
- -  Annex B - Correspondence with ISO/IEC 27002:2013
Annex A explains how an organization can use attributes (see ) to create its own views based on the control attributes defined in this document or of its own creation.
Annex B shows the  correspondence  between  the  controls  in  this  edition  of  ISO/IEC  27002  and  the previous 2013 edition.
##  Themes	and	attributes
The categorization of controls given in Clauses 5 to 8 are referred to as themes.
Controls are categorized as:
- a) people, if they concern individual people;
- b) physical, if they concern physical objects;
- c) technological, if they concern technology;
- d) otherwise they are categorized as organizational.
The organization can use attributes to create different views which are different categorizations of controls as seen from a different perspective to the themes. Attributes can be used to filter, sort or present controls in different views for different audiences. Annex A explains how this can be achieved and provides an example of a view.
By  way  of  example,  each  control  in  this  document  has  been  associated  with  five  attributes  with corresponding attribute values (preceded by "#" to make them searchable), as follows:
## a) Control type
Control type is an attribute to view controls from the perspective of when and how the control modifies the risk with regard to the occurrence of an information security incident. Attribute values consist  of  Preventive  (the  control  that  is  intended  to  prevent  the  occurrence  of  an  information security incident), Detective (the control acts when an information security incident occurs) and Corrective (the control acts after an information security incident occurs).
## b) Information security properties
Information  security  properties  is  an  attribute  to  view  controls  from  the  perspective  of  which characteristic of information the control will contribute to preserving. Attribute values consist of Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability.
- c) Cybersecurity concepts
Cybersecurity concepts is an attribute to view controls from the perspective of the association of controls to cybersecurity concepts defined in the cybersecurity framework described in ISO/ IEC TS 27110. Attribute values consist of Identify, Protect, Detect, Respond and Recover.
## d) Operational capabilities
Operational  capabilities  is  an  attribute  to  view  controls  from  the  practitioner's  perspective  of information  security  capabilities.  Attribute  values  consist  of  Governance,  Asset\_management, Information\_protection, Human\_resource\_security, Physical\_security, System\_and\_network\_ security, Application\_security, Secure\_configuration, Identity\_and\_access\_management, Threat\_and\_vulnerability\_management,  Continuity,  Supplier\_relationships\_security,  Legal\_and\_ compliance, Information\_security\_event\_management and Information\_security\_assurance.
## e) Security domains
Security domains is an attribute to view controls from the perspective of four information security domains:  'Governance  and  Ecosystem'  includes  'Information  System  Security  Governance  &amp; Risk Management' and 'Ecosystem cybersecurity management' (including internal and external stakeholders);  'Protection'  includes  'IT  Security  Architecture',  'IT  Security  Administration', 'Identity  and  access  management',  'IT  Security  Maintenance'  and  'Physical  and  environmental security'; 'Defence' includes 'Detection' and 'Computer Security Incident Management'; 'Resilience' includes 'Continuity of operations' and 'Crisis management'. Attribute values consist of Governance\_and\_Ecosystem, Protection, Defence and Resilience.
The attributes given in this document are selected because they are considered generic enough to be used by different types of organizations. Organizations can choose to disregard one or more of the attributes given in this document. They can also create attributes of their own (with the corresponding attribute values) to create their own organizational views. 