##  Networks security
| Control type           | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities       | Security domains   |
|------------------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------|
| #Preventive #Detective | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect #Detect         | #System_and_net- work_security | #Protection        |
## Control
Networks and network devices should be secured, managed and controlled to protect information in systems and applications.
## Purpose
To  protect  information  in  networks  and  its  supporting  information  processing  facilities  from compromise via the network.
## Guidance
Controls  should  be  implemented  to  ensure  the  security  of  information  in  networks  and  to  protect connected services from unauthorized access. In particular, the following items should be considered:
- a) the type and classification level of information that the network can support;
- b) establishing  responsibilities  and  procedures  for  the  management  of  networking  equipment and devices;
- c) maintaining  up  to  date  documentation  including  network  diagrams  and  configuration  files  of devices (e.g. routers, switches);
- d) separating operational responsibility for networks from ICT system operations where appropriate (see  );
- e) establishing  controls  to  safeguard  the  confidentiality  and  integrity  of  data  passing  over  public networks, third-party networks or over wireless networks and to protect the connected systems and applications (see , ,  and ). Additional controls can also be required to maintain the availability of the network services and computers connected to the network;
- f) appropriately logging and monitoring to enable recording and detection of actions that can affect, or are relevant to, information security (see  and  );
- g) closely  coordinating  network  management  activities  both  to  optimize  the  service  to  the organization and to ensure that controls are consistently applied across the information processing infrastructure;
- h) authenticating systems on the network;
- i) restricting and filtering systems connection to the network (e.g. using firewalls);
- j) detecting, restricting and authenticating the connection of equipment and devices to the network;
- k) hardening of network devices;
- l) segregating network administration channels from other network traffic;
- m)  temporarily isolating critical subnetworks (e.g. with drawbridges) if the network is under attack;
- n) disabling vulnerable network protocols.
The organization should ensure that appropriate security controls are applied to the use of virtualized networks. Virtualized networks also cover software-defined networking (SDN, SD-WAN). Virtualized networks  can  be  desirable  from  a  security  viewpoint,  since  they  can  permit  logical  separation  of communication taking place over physical networks, particularly for systems and applications that are implemented using distributed computing.
## Other information
Additional information on network security can be found in the ISO/IEC 27033 series.
More information concerning virtualized networks can be found in ISO/IEC TS 23167.
##  Security of network services
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities       | Security domains   |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #System_and_net- work_security | #Protection        |
## Control
Security mechanisms, service levels and service requirements of network services should be identified, implemented and monitored.
## Purpose
To ensure security in the use of network services.
## Guidance
The security measures necessary for particular services, such as security features, service levels and service requirements, should be identified and implemented (by internal or external network service providers). The organization should ensure that network service providers implement these measures.
