PII) is a concern, the organization should consider hiding such data by using techniques such as data masking, pseudonymization or anonymization.
Pseudonymization or anonymization techniques can hide PII, disguise the true identity of PII principals or other sensitive information, and disconnect the link between PII and the identity of the PII principal or the link between other sensitive information.
When using pseudonymization or anonymization techniques, it should be verified that data has been adequately  pseudonymized  or  anonymized.  Data  anonymization  should  consider  all  the  elements of  the  sensitive  information to be effective. As an example, if not considered properly, a person can be identified even if the data that can directly identify that person is anonymised, by the presence of further data which allows the person to be identified indirectly.
Additional techniques for data masking include:
- a) encryption (requiring authorized users to have a key);
- b) nulling or deleting characters (preventing unauthorized users from seeing full messages);
- c) varying numbers and dates;
- d) substitution (changing one value for another to hide sensitive data);
- e) replacing values with their hash.
The following should be considered when implementing data masking techniques:
- a) not granting all users access to all data, therefore designing queries and masks in order to show only the minimum required data to the user;
- b) there are cases where some data should not be visible to the user for some records out of a set of data; in this case, designing and implementing a mechanism for obfuscation of data (e.g. if a patient does not want hospital staff to be able to see all of their records, even in case of emergency, then the hospital staff are presented with partially obfuscated data and data can only be accessed by staff with specific roles if it contains useful information for appropriate treatment);
- c) when data are obfuscated, giving the PII principal the possibility to require that users cannot see if the data are obfuscated (obfuscation of the obfuscation; this is used in health facilities, for example if  the  patient  does  not  want  personnel  to  see  that  sensitive  information  such  as  pregnancies  or results of blood exams has been obfuscated);
- d) any legal or regulatory requirements (e.g. requiring the masking of payment cards' information during processing or storage).
The following should be considered when using data masking, pseudonymization or anonymization:
- a) level of strength of data masking, pseudonymization or anonymization according to the usage of the processed data;
- b) access controls to the processed data;
- c) agreements or restrictions on usage of the processed data;
- d) prohibiting collating the processed data with other information in order to identify the PII principal;
- e) keeping track of providing and receiving the processed data.
## Other information
Anonymization irreversibly alters PII in such a way that the PII principal can no longer be identified directly or indirectly.
Pseudonymization  replaces  the  identifying  information  with  an  alias.  Knowledge  of  the  algorithm (sometimes referred to as the 'additional information') used to perform the pseudonymization allows for  at  least  some  form  of  identification  of  the  PII  principal.  Such  'additional  information'  should therefore be kept separate and protected.
While  pseudonymization  is  therefore  weaker  than  anonymization,  pseudonymized  datasets  can  be more useful in statistical research.
Data masking is a set of techniques to conceal, substitute or obfuscate sensitive data items. Data masking can be static (when data items are masked in the original database), dynamic (using automation and rules to secure data in real-time) or on-the-fly (with data masked in an application's memory).
Hash functions can be used in order to anonymize PII. In order to prevent enumeration attacks, they should always be combined with a salt function.
PII in resource identifiers and their attributes [e.g. file names, uniform resource locators (URLs)] should be either avoided or appropriately anonymized.
Additional controls concerning the protection of PII in public clouds are given in ISO/IEC 27018.
Additional information on de-identification techniques is available in ISO/IEC 20889.
##  Data leakage prevention
| Control type           | Information security properties   | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities   | Security domains     |
|------------------------|-----------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------|
| #Preventive #Detective | #Confidentiality                  | #Protect #Detect         | #Information_pro- tection  | #Protection #Defence |
## Control
Data leakage prevention measures should be applied to systems, networks and any other devices that process, store or transmit sensitive information.
## Purpose
To detect and prevent the unauthorized disclosure and extraction of information by individuals or systems.
## Guidance
The organization should consider the following to reduce the risk of data leakage:
- a) identifying  and  classifying  information  to  protect  against  leakage  (e.g.  personal  information, pricing models and product designs);
- b) monitoring  channels  of  data  leakage  (e.g.  email,  file  transfers,  mobile  devices  and  portable storage devices);
- c) acting to prevent information from leaking (e.g. quarantine emails containing sensitive information).
Data leakage prevention tools should be used to:
- a) identify and monitor sensitive information at risk of unauthorized disclosure (e.g. in unstructured data on a user's system);
- b) detect  the  disclosure  of  sensitive  information  (e.g.  when  information  is  uploaded  to  untrusted third-party cloud services or sent via email);
- c) block user actions or network transmissions that expose sensitive information (e.g. preventing the copying of database entries into a spreadsheet).
The organization should determine if it is necessary to restrict a user's ability to copy and paste or upload data to services, devices and storage media outside of the organization. If that is the case, the organization should implement technology such as data leakage prevention tools or the configuration of existing tools that allow users to view and manipulate data held remotely but prevent copy and paste outside of the organization's control.
If  data  export  is  required,  the  data  owner  should  be  allowed  to  approve  the  export  and  hold  users accountable for their actions.
Taking screenshots or photographs of the screen should be addressed through terms and conditions of use, training and auditing.
Where  data  is  backed  up,  care  should  be  taken  to  ensure  sensitive  information  is  protected using  measures  such  as  encryption,  access  control  and  physical  protection  of  the  storage  media holding the backup.
Data  leakage  prevention  should  also  be  considered  to  protect  against  the  intelligence  actions  of  an adversary from obtaining confidential or secret information (geopolitical, human, financial, commercial, scientific or any other) which can be of interest for espionage or can be critical for the community. The data leakage prevention actions should be oriented to confuse the adversary's decisions for example by replacing authentic information with false information, either as an independent action or as response to the adversary's intelligence actions. Examples of these kinds of actions are reverse social engineering or the use of honeypots to attract attackers.
## Other information
Data leakage prevention tools are designed to identify data, monitor data usage and movement, and take actions to prevent data from leaking (e.g. alerting users to their risky behaviour and blocking the transfer of data to portable storage devices).
Data  leakage  prevention  inherently  involves  monitoring  personnel's  communications  and  online activities,  and  by  extension  external  party  messages,  which  raises  legal  concerns  that  should  be considered prior to deploying data leakage prevention tools. There is a variety of legislation relating to privacy, data protection, employment, interception of data and telecommunications that is applicable to monitoring and data processing in the context of data leakage prevention.
Data leakage prevention can be supported by standard security controls, such as topic-specific policies on access control and secure document management (see  and ).
## 	Information	backup
| Control type   | Information security properties   | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities   | Security domains   |
|----------------|-----------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|--------------------|
| #Corrective    | #Integrity #Availability          | #Recover                 | #Continuity                | #Protection        |
## Control
Backup  copies  of  information,  software  and  systems  should  be  maintained  and  regularly  tested  in accordance with the agreed topic-specific policy on backup.
## Purpose
To enable recovery from loss of data or systems.
## Guidance
A topic-specific policy on backup should be established to address the organization's data retention and information security requirements.
Adequate backup facilities should be provided to ensure that all essential information and software can be recovered following an incident or failure or loss of storage media.
Plans  should  be  developed  and  implemented  for  how  the  organization  will  back  up  information, software and systems, to address the topic-specific policy on backup.
When designing a backup plan, the following items should be taken into consideration:
- a) producing accurate and complete records of the backup copies and documented restoration procedures;
- b) reflecting  the  business  requirements  of  the  organization  (e.g.  the  recovery  point  objective,  see ), the security requirements of the information involved and the criticality of the information to the continued operation of the organization in the extent (e.g. full or differential backup) and frequency of backups;
- c) storing the backups in a safe and secure remote location, at a sufficient distance to escape any damage from a disaster at the main site;
- d) giving  backup  information  an  appropriate  level  of  physical  and  environmental  protection  (see Clause 7 and  ) consistent with the standards applied at the main site;
- e) regularly  testing  backup  media  to  ensure  that  they  can  be  relied  on  for  emergency  use  when necessary. Testing the ability to restore backed-up data onto a test system, not by overwriting the original storage media in case the backup or restoration process fails and causes irreparable data damage or loss;
- f) protecting  backups  by  means  of  encryption  according  to  the  identified  risks  (e.g.  in  situations where confidentiality is of importance);
- g) taking care to ensure that inadvertent data loss is detected before backup is taken.
Operational  procedures  should  monitor  the  execution  of  backups  and  address  failures  of  scheduled backups to ensure completeness of backups according to the topic-specific policy on backups.
Backup measures for individual systems and services should be regularly tested to ensure that they meet  the  objectives  of  incident  response  and  business  continuity  plans  (see  ).  This  should  be combined with a test of the restoration procedures and checked against the restoration time required
by the business continuity plan. In the case of critical systems and services, backup measures should cover all systems information, applications and data necessary to recover the complete system in the event of a disaster.
When  the  organization  uses  a  cloud  service,  backup  copies  of  the  organization's  information, applications and systems in the cloud service environment should be taken. The organization should determine if and how requirements for backup are fulfilled when using the information backup service provided as part of the cloud service.
The  retention  period  for  essential  business  information  should  be  determined,  taking  into  account any  requirement  for  retention  of  archive  copies.  The  organization  should  consider  the  deletion  of information (see ) in storage media used for backup once the information's retention period expires and should take into consideration legislation and regulations.
## Other information
For further information on storage security including retention consideration, see ISO/IEC 27040.
##  Redundancy of information processing facilities
| Control type   | Information security properties   | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities      | Security domains        |
|----------------|-----------------------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Availability                     | #Protect                 | #Continuity #Asset_management | #Protection #Resilience |
## Control
Information processing facilities should be implemented with redundancy sufficient to meet availability requirements.
## Purpose
To ensure the continuous operation of information processing facilities.
## Guidance
The organization should identify requirements for the availability of business services and information systems.  The  organization  should  design  and  implement  systems  architecture  with  appropriate redundancy to meet these requirements.
Redundancy  can  be  introduced  by  duplicating  information  processing  facilities  in  part  or  in  their entirety  (i.e.  spare  components  or  having  two  of  everything).  The  organization  should  plan  and implement  procedures  for  the  activation  of  the  redundant  components  and  processing  facilities. The procedures should establish  if  the  redundant  components  and  processing  activities  are  always activated, or in case of emergency, automatically or manually activated. The redundant components and information processing facilities should ensure the same security level as the primary ones.
Mechanisms should be in place to alert the organization to any failure in the information processing facilities,  enable  executing  the  planned  procedure  and  allow  continued  availability  while  the information processing facilities are repaired or replaced.
The organization should consider the following when implementing redundant systems:
- a) contracting with two or more suppliers of network and critical information processing facilities such as internet service providers;
- b) using redundant networks;
- c) using two geographically separate data centres with mirrored systems;
- d) using physically redundant power supplies or sources;
- e) using multiple parallel instances of software components, with automatic load balancing between them (between instances in the same data centre or in different data centres);
- f) having  duplicated  components  in  systems  (e.g.  CPU,  hard  disks,  memories)  or  in  networks  (e.g. firewalls, routers, switches).
Where applicable, preferably in production mode, redundant information systems should be tested to ensure the failover from one component to another component works as intended.
## Other information
There is a strong relationship between redundancy and ICT readiness for business continuity (see ) especially if short recovery times are required. Many of the redundancy measures can be part of the ICT continuity strategies and solutions.
The  implementation  of  redundancies  can  introduce  risks  to  the  integrity  (e.g.  processes  of  copying data to duplicated components can introduce errors) or confidentiality (e.g. weak security control of duplicated components can lead to compromise) of information and information systems, which need to be considered when designing information systems.
Redundancy in information processing facilities does not usually address application unavailability due to faults within an application.
With  the  use  of  public  cloud  computing,  it  is  possible  to  have  multiple  live  versions  of  information processing facilities, existing in multiple separate physical locations with automatic failover and load balancing between them.
Some  of  the  technologies  and  techniques  for  providing  redundancy  and  automatic  fail-over  in  the context of cloud services are discussed in ISO/IEC TS 23167.
##  Logging
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities                 | Security domains     |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|------------------------------------------|----------------------|
| #Detective     | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Detect                  | #Information_securi- ty_event_management | #Protection #Defence |
## Control
Logs that record activities, exceptions, faults and other relevant events should be produced, stored, protected and analysed.
