The sponsor shall submit  the  requested  additional  information  within  the  period  set  by  the  Member  State  concerned,  which  shall  not exceed 12 days from the receipt of the request. The expiry of the last deadline pursuant to point (d) of paragraph 4 shall be suspended from the date of the request until such time as the additional information has been received.
- 6. For  class  IIb  and  class  III  devices,  the  coordinating  Member  State  may  also  extend  the  periods  referred  to  in paragraph 4 by a further 50 days, for  the purpose of consulting with experts.
- 7. The  Commission  may,  by  means  of  implementing  acts,  further specify the procedures and timescales for coordinated  assessments  to  be  taken  into  account  by  Member  States  concerned  when  deciding  on  the  sponsor's application.  Such  implementing  acts  may  also  set  out  the  procedures  and  timescales  for  coordinated  assessment  in  the case  of  substantial  modifications  pursuant  to  paragraph  12  of  this  Article,  in  the  case  of  reporting  of  adverse  events pursuant to Article 80(4) and in the case of clinical investigations of combination products between medical devices and medicinal products, where the latter are under a concurrent coordinated assessment of a clinical trial under Regulation (EU) No 536/2014. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 114(3).
- 8. Where the conclusion of  the coordinating Member State concerning the area of coordinated assessment is that the conduct  of  the  clinical  investigation  is  acceptable  or  acceptable  subject  to  compliance  with  specific  conditions,  that conclusion shall be deemed to be the conclusion of all Member States concerned. Notwithstanding  the  first  subparagraph,  a  Member  State  concerned  may  only  disagree  with  the  conclusion  of  the coordinating Member State concerning the area of coordinated assessment on the following grounds:
- (a)   when  it  considers  that  participation  in  the  clinical  investigation  would  lead  to  a  subject  receiving  treatment  inferior to that received in normal clinical practice in that Member State concerned;
- (b)   infringement of national law; or
- (c)   considerations as regards subject safety and data reliability and robustness submitted under point (b) of paragraph 4.
Where  one  of  the  Member  States  concerned  disagrees  with  the  conclusion  on  the  basis  of  the  second  subparagraph  of this  paragraph,  it  shall  communicate  its  disagreement,  together  with  a  detailed  justification,  through  the  electronic system referred to in Article 73, to the Commission, to all other Member States concerned and to the sponsor.
- 9. Where the conclusion of  the coordinating Member State concerning the area of coordinated assessment is that the clinical  investigation  is  not  acceptable,  that  conclusion  shall  be  deemed  to  be  the  conclusion  of  all  Member  States concerned.
- 10. A  Member  State  concerned  shall  refuse  to  authorise  a  clinical  investigation  if  it  disagrees  with  the  conclusion  of the  coordinating Member State as regards any of  the grounds referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 8, or if  it  finds,  on  duly  justified  grounds,  that  the  aspects  addressed  in  Sections  ,  ,  ,    and    of  Chapter  II  of Annex XV are not complied with, or  where an ethics committee has issued a negative opinion in relation to that clinical investigation,  which  is  valid,  in  accordance  with  national  law,  for  that  entire  Member  State.  That  Member  State  shall provide for an appeal procedure in respect of such refusal.
- 11. Each Member State concerned shall notify the  sponsor  through the  electronic  system referred  to in  Article  73  as to  whether  the  clinical  investigation  is  authorised,  whether  it  is  authorised  subject  to  conditions,  or  whether  authoris­ ation  has  been  refused.  Notification  shall  be  done  by  way  of  one  single  decision  within  five  days  of  the  transmission, pursuant to point (d) of paragraph 4, by the coordinating Member State of the final assessment report. Where an author­ isation  of  a  clinical  investigation  is  subject  to  conditions,  those  conditions  may  only  be  such  that,  by  their  nature,  they cannot be fulfilled at the time of that authorisation.
- 12. Any  substantial  modifications  as  referred  to  in  Article  75  shall  be  notified  to  the  Member  States  concerned  by means  of  the  electronic  system  referred  to  in  Article  73.  Any  assessment  as  to  whether there  are  grounds  for disagreement  as  referred  to  in  the  second  subparagraph  of  paragraph  8  of  this  Article  shall  be  carried  out  under  the direction  of  the  coordinating  Member  State,  except  for  substantial  modifications  concerning  Sections  ,  ,  ,  and  of Chapter II of Annex XV, which shall be assessed separately by each Member State concerned.
- 13. The  Commission  shall  provide  administrative  support  to  the  coordinating  Member  State  in  the  accomplishment of  its  tasks  under  this Chapter.
- 14. The procedure set out in this Article  shall,  until  27  May  2027,  be  applied  only  by those  of  the  Member  States  in which the clinical investigation is to be conducted which have agreed to apply it. After 27 May 2027, all Member States shall be required to apply that procedure.
## Article 79
## Review of coordinated assessment procedure
By  27  May  2026,  the  Commission  shall  submit  to  the  European  Parliament  and  to  the  Council  a  report  on  experience gained  from  the  application  of  Article  78  and,  if  necessary,  propose  a  review  of  Article  78(14)  and  point  (h)  of Article 123(3).
## Article 80
## Recording and reporting of adverse events that occur during clinical investigations
- 1. The sponsor shall fully record all of the following:
- (a)   any  adverse  event  of  a  type  identified  in  the  clinical  investigation  plan  as  being  critical  to  the  evaluation  of  the results of  that clinical investigation;
- (b)   any serious adverse event; - (c)   any  device  deficiency  that  might  have  led  to  a  serious  adverse  event  if  appropriate  action  had  not  been  taken, intervention had not occurred, or circumstances had been less fortunate;
- (d)   any new findings in relation to any event referred to in points (a) to (c).
- 2. The sponsor shall report, without delay to all Member States in which the clinical investigation is being conducted, all  of  the  following by means of  the electronic system referred to in Article 73:
- (a) any serious adverse event that has a causal relationship with the investigational device, the comparator or the investi­ gation procedure or where such causal relationship is reasonably possible;
- (b)   any  device  deficiency  that  might  have  led  to  a  serious  adverse  event  if  appropriate  action  had  not  been  taken, intervention had not occurred, or circumstances had been less fortunate;
- (c)   any new findings in relation to any event referred to in points (a) and (b).
The period for  reporting shall take account of  the severity of  the event. Where necessary to ensure timely reporting, the sponsor may submit an initial report that is incomplete followed up by a complete report.
Upon request  by  any  Member  State  in  which  the  clinical  investigation  is  being  conducted,  the  sponsor  shall  provide  all information referred to in paragraph 1.
- 3. The sponsor shall also report to the Member States in which the clinical investigation is being conducted any event referred  to  in  paragraph  2  of  this  Article  that  occurred  in  third  countries  in  which  a  clinical  investigation  is  performed under  the  same  clinical  investigation  plan  as  the  one  applying  to  a  clinical  investigation  covered  by  this  Regulation  by means of the electronic system referred to in Article 73.
- 4. In  the  case  of  a  clinical  investigation  for  which  the  sponsor  has  used  the  single  application  referred  to  in Article  78,  the  sponsor  shall  report  any  event  as  referred  to  in  paragraph  2  of  this  Article  by  means  of  the  electronic system  referred  to  in  Article  73.  Upon  receipt,  this  report  shall  be  transmitted  electronically  to  all  Member  States  in which the clinical investigation is being conducted.
Under  the  direction  of  the  coordinating  Member  State  referred  to  in  Article  78(2),  the  Member  States  shall  coordinate their  assessment of  serious adverse events and device deficiencies to determine whether  to modify, suspend or  terminate the clinical investigation or  whether  to revoke the authorisation for  that clinical investigation.
This  paragraph  shall  not  affect  the  rights  of  the  other  Member  States  to  perform  their  own  evaluation  and  to  adopt measures  in  accordance  with  this  Regulation  in  order  to  ensure  the  protection  of  public  health  and  patient  safety.  The coordinating  Member State and  the  Commission  shall  be  kept  informed  of  the  outcome  of  any  such  evaluation  and  the adoption of any such measures.
- 5. In the case of PMCF investigations referred to in Article 74(1), the provisions on vigilance laid down in Articles 87 to 90 and in the acts adopted pursuant to Article 91 shall apply instead of this Article.
- 6. Notwithstanding  paragraph  5,  this  Article  shall  apply  where  a  causal  relationship  between  the  serious  adverse event and the preceding investigational procedure has been established.
## Article 81
## Implementing acts
The  Commission  may,  by  means  of  implementing  acts,  establish  the  detailed  arrangements  and  procedural  aspects necessary for  the implementation of this Chapter as regards the following:
- (a)   harmonised  electronic  forms  for  the  application  for  clinical  investigations  and  their  assessment  as  referred  to  in Articles 70 and 78, taking into account specific categories or groups of devices;
- (b)   the  functioning of  the electronic system referred to in Article 73;
- (c)   harmonised  electronic  forms  for  the  notification  of  PMCF  investigations  as  referred  to  in  Article  74(1),  and  of substantial modifications as referred to in Article 75;
- (d)   the  exchange of information between Member States as referred to in Article 76;
- (e)   harmonised  electronic  forms  for  the  reporting  of  serious  adverse  events  and  device  deficiencies  as  referred  to  in Article 80;
- (f)   the  timelines  for  the  reporting  of  serious  adverse  events  and  device  deficiencies,  taking  into  account  the  severity  of the event to be reported as referred to in Article 80;
- (g)   uniform  application  of  the  requirements  regarding  the  clinical  evidence  or  data  needed  to  demonstrate  compliance with the general safety and performance requirements set out in Annex I.
The implementing acts referred to in the first  paragraph shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 114(3).
## Article 82
## Requirements regarding other clinical investigations
- 1. Clinical  investigations,  not  performed  pursuant  to  any  of  the  purposes  listed  in  Article  62(1),  shall  comply  with the provisions of Article 62 (2) and (3), points (b), (c), (d), (f), (h), and (l) of Article 62(4) and Article 62(6).
- 2. In  order  to  protect  the  rights,  safety,  dignity  and  well-being  of  subjects  and  the  scientific  and  ethical  integrity  of clinical  investigations  not  performed  for  any of  the  purposes  listed  in  Article  62(1),  each  Member  State  shall  define  any additional requirements for such investigations, as appropriate for each Member State concerned.
## CHAPTER VII
## POST-MARKET SURVEILLANCE, VIGILANCE AND MARKET SURVEILLANCE
## SECTION 1
## Post-market surveillance
## Article 83
## Post-market surveillance system of the manufacturer
- 1. 