( 1 ) Opinion of 14 February 2013 (OJ C 133, , p. 52).
- ( 2 ) Position of the European Parliament of 2 April 2014 (not yet published in the Official Journal) and position of the Council at first reading of 7 March 2017 (not yet published in the Official Journal).
- ( 3 ) Council Directive 90/385/EEC of 20 June 1990 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to active implantable medical devices (OJ L 189, , p. 17).
- ( 4 ) Council Directive 93/42/EEC of 14 June 1993 concerning medical devices (OJ L 169, , p. 1). As regards Article 168(4)(c) TFEU, this Regulation sets high standards of quality and safety for medical devices by ensuring,  among  other  things,  that  data  generated  in  clinical  investigations  are  reliable  and  robust  and  that  the safety of  the subjects participating in a clinical investigation is protected.
- (3) This  Regulation  does  not  seek  to  harmonise  rules  relating  to  the  further  making  available  on  the  market  of medical devices after they have already been put into service such as in the context of second-hand sales.
- (4) Key  elements  of the existing regulatory  approach,  such  as  the  supervision  of  notified  bodies,  conformity assessment  procedures,  clinical  investigations  and  clinical  evaluation,  vigilance  and  market  surveillance  should  be significantly  reinforced,  whilst  provisions  ensuring  transparency  and  traceability  regarding  medical  devices  should be introduced, to improve health and safety.
- (5) To  the  extent  possible,  guidance  developed  for  medical  devices  at  international  level,  in  particular  in  the  context of  the  Global  Harmonization  Task  Force  (GHTF)  and  its  follow-up  initiative,  the  International  Medical  Devices Regulators  Forum  (IMDRF),  should  be  taken  into  account  to  promote  the  global  convergence  of  regulations which  contributes  to  a  high  level  of  safety  protection  worldwide,  and  to  facilitate  trade,  in  particular  in  the provisions  on  Unique  Device  Identification,  general  safety  and  performance  requirements,  technical  documen­ tation, classification rules, conformity assessment procedures and clinical investigations.
- (6) For  historical  reasons,  active  implantable  medical  devices,  covered  by  Directive  90/385/EEC,  and  other  medical devices,  covered  by  Directive  93/42/EEC,  were  regulated  in  two  separate  legal  instruments.  In  the  interest  of simplification,  both  directives,  which  have  been  amended  several  times,  should  be  replaced  by  a  single  legislative act applicable to all medical devices other  than in  vitro diagnostic medical devices.
- (7) The  scope  of  application  of  this  Regulation  should  be  clearly  delimited  from  other  Union  harmonisation legislation  concerning  products,  such  as in  vitro diagnostic  medical  devices,  medicinal  products,  cosmetics  and food.  Therefore,  Regulation  (EC)  No  178/2002  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  ( 1 )  should  be amended to exclude medical devices from its scope.
- (8) It  should  be  the  responsibility  of  the  Member  States  to  decide  on  a  case-by-case  basis  whether  or  not  a  product falls  within  the scope of  this Regulation. In order  to ensure consistent qualification decisions in that regard across all  Member States,  particularly  with  regard to borderline  cases,  the  Commission  should  be  allowed  to, on  its  own initiative or at the duly substantiated request of a Member  State, having consulted the Medical Device Coordination  Group  ('MDCG'),  decide  on  a  case-by-case  basis  whether  or  not  a  specific  product,  category  or group  of  products  falls  within  the  scope  of  this  Regulation.  When  deliberating  on  the  regulatory  status  of products  in  borderline  cases  involving  medicinal  products,  human  tissues  and  cells,  biocidal  products  or  food products,  the  Commission  should  ensure  an  appropriate  level  of  consultation  of  the  European  Medicines Agency (EMA), the European Chemicals Agency and the European Food Safety Authority, as relevant.
- (9) Since in some cases it is difficult  to distinguish  between medical  devices and  cosmetic products, the possibility of taking  a  Union-wide  decision  regarding  the regulatory status of a product  should  also be introduced  in Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 2 ).
- (10) Products  which  combine  a  medicinal  product  or  substance  and  a  medical  device  are  regulated  either  under  this Regulation or  under  Directive  2001/83/EC of  the European Parliament and of  the Council.  ( 3 )  The  two  legislative acts  should  ensure  appropriate  interaction  in  terms  of  consultations  during  pre-market  assessment,  and  of exchange of information in the context of vigilance activities involving such combination products. For  medicinal products  that  integrate  a  medical  device  part,  compliance  with  the  general  safety  and  performance  requirements laid  down  in  this  Regulation  for  the  device  part  should  be  adequately  assessed  in  the  context  of  the  marketing authorisation for such medicinal products. Directive 2001/83/EC should therefore be amended.
( 1 ) Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 January 2002 laying down the general principles and requirements  of  food  law,  establishing  the  European  Food  Safety  Authority  and  laying  down  procedures  in  matters  of  food  safety (OJ L 31, , p. 1).
( 2 ) Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 November 2009 on cosmetic products (OJ L 342, , p. 59).
( 3 ) Directive  2001/83/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  6  November  2001  on  the  Community  code  relating  to medicinal products for human use (OJ L 311, , p. 67). - (11) Union legislation,  in particular  Regulation  (EC)  No  1394/2007  of  the  European Parliament  and  of  the  Council  ( 1 ) and  Directive  2004/23/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  ( 2 ),  is  incomplete  in  respect  of  certain products manufactured utilising derivatives of  tissues or cells of human origin that are non-viable or are rendered non-viable.  Such  products  should  come  under  the  scope  of  this  Regulation,  provided  they  comply  with  the definition of a medical device or are covered by this Regulation.
- (12) Certain  groups  of  products  for  which  a  manufacturer  claims  only  an  aesthetic  or  another  non-medical  purpose but  which  are  similar  to  medical  devices  in  terms  of  functioning  and  risks  profile  should  be  covered  by  this Regulation. In order for manufacturers  to  be able to  demonstrate  the conformity  of such  products, the Commission  should  adopt  common  specifications  at  least  with  regard  to  application  of  risk  management  and, where necessary, clinical evaluation regarding safety. Such common  specifications should be developed specifically  for  a  group  of  products  without  an  intended  medical  purpose  and  should  not  be  used  for  conformity assessment  of  the  analogous  devices  with  a  medical  purpose.  Devices  with  both  a  medical  and  a  non-medical intended  purpose  should  fulfil  both  the  requirements  applicable  to  devices  with,  and  to  devices  without,  an intended medical purpose.
- (13) As  is  the  case  for  products  that  contain  viable  tissues  or  cells  of  human  or  animal  origin,  that  are  explicitly excluded  from  Directives  90/385/EEC  and  93/42/EEC  and  hence  from  this  Regulation,  it  should  be  clarified  that products  that  contain  or  consist  of  viable  biological  materials  or  viable  organisms  of  another  origin  in  order  to achieve or support the intended purpose of those products are not covered by this Regulation either.
- (14) The  requirements  laid  down  in  Directive  2002/98/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  ( 3 )  should continue to apply.
- (15) There  is  scientific  uncertainty  about  the  risks  and  benefits  of  nanomaterials  used  for  devices.  In  order  to  ensure a  high  level  of  health  protection, free  movement of goods and legal certainty  for  manufacturers, it is necessary to introduce  a  uniform  definition  for  nanomaterials  based  on  Commission  Recommendation  2011/696/EU  ( 4 ),  with the  necessary  flexibility  to  adapt  that  definition  to  scientific  and  technical  progress  and  subsequent  regulatory development  at  Union  and  international  level.  In  the  design  and  manufacture  of  devices,  manufacturers  should take  special  care  when  using  nanoparticles  for  which  there  is  a  high  or  medium  potential  for  internal  exposure. Such  devices  should  be  subject  to  the  most  stringent  conformity  assessment  procedures.  In  preparation  of implementing acts regulating the practical  and  uniform  application  of  the  corresponding  requirements  laid  down in  this  Regulation,  the  relevant  scientific  opinions  of  the  relevant  scientific  committees  should  be  taken  into account.
- (16) Safety  aspects  addressed  by  Directive  2014/30/EU  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  ( 5 )  are  an integral  part  of  the  general  safety  and  performance  requirements  laid  down  in  this  Regulation  for  devices. Consequently, this Regulation should be considered a lex  specialis in relation to that Directive.
- (17) This  Regulation  should  include  requirements  regarding  the  design  and  manufacture  of  devices  emitting  ionizing radiation without  affecting the application of  Council Directive  2013/59/Euratom ( 6 )  which  pursues  other objectives.
- (18) This Regulation should include requirements for devices' design, safety and performance characteristics which are developed in such a way as to prevent occupational injuries, including protection from radiation.
- ( 1 ) Regulation (EC) No 1394/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 November 2007 on advanced therapy medicinal products and amending Directive 2001/83/EC and Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 (OJ L 324, , p. 121).
2
(
)
Directive 2004/23/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 March 2004 on setting standards of quality and safety for the donation, procurement, testing, processing, preservation, storage and distribution of human tissues and cells (OJ L 102, , p. 48).
- ( 3 ) Directive 2002/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 January 2003 setting standards of quality and safety for the collection, testing, processing, storage and distribution of human blood and blood components (OJ L 33, , p. 30).
- ( 4 ) Commission Recommendation 2011/696/EU of 18 October 2011 on the definition of nanomaterial (OJ L 275, , p. 38).
