- 3. By  way  of  derogation  from  Sections  1  and  2  above,  the  procedures  in  this  Annex  coupled  with  the  drawing  up of  technical  documentation  as  set  out  in  Annexes  II  and  III  may  also  be  applied  by  manufacturers  of  class  IIa devices.
## PART A
## PRODUCTION QUALITY ASSURANCE
- 4. The manufacturer shall ensure  that  the  quality  management  system approved  for  the  manufacture  of  the  devices concerned  is  implemented,  shall  carry  out  a  final  verification,  as  specified  in  Section  6,  and  shall  be  subject  to the surveillance referred to in Section 7.
- 5. When  the  manufacturer  fulfils  the  obligations  laid  down  in  Section  4,  it  shall  draw  up  and  keep  an  EU declaration  of  conformity  in  accordance  with  Article  19  and  Annex  IV  for  the  device  covered  by  the  conformity assessment  procedure.  By  issuing  an  EU  declaration  of  conformity,  the  manufacturer  shall  be  deemed  to  ensure and  to  declare  that  the  device  concerned  conforms  to  the  type  described  in  the  EU  type-examination  certificate and meets the requirements of this Regulation which apply to the device.
- 6. Quality management system
- . The  manufacturer  shall  lodge  an  application  for  assessment  of  its  quality  management  system  with  a  notified body. The application shall include:
- -  all elements listed in Section  of Annex IX,
- -  the technical documentation referred to in Annexes II and III for  the types approved, and
- -  a  copy  of  the  EU  type-examination  certificates  referred  to  in  Section  4  of  Annex  X;  if  the  EU  typeexamination  certificates  have  been  issued  by  the  same  notified  body  with  which  the  application  is  lodged, a  reference to the technical documentation and its updates and the certificates issued shall also be included in the application.
- . Implementation  of  the  quality  management  system  shall  be  such  as  to  ensure  that  there  is  compliance  with  the type  described  in  the  EU  type-examination  certificate  and  with  the  provisions  of  this  Regulation  which  apply  to the  devices  at  each  stage.  All  the  elements,  requirements  and  provisions  adopted  by  the  manufacturer  for  its quality  management  system  shall  be  documented  in  a  systematic  and  orderly  manner  in  the  form  of  a  quality manual and written policies and procedures, such as quality programmes, quality plans and quality records.
- That documentation shall, in particular, include an adequate description of all elements listed in points (a), (b), (d) and (e) of Section  of Annex IX.
- . The first and second paragraph of Section  of Annex IX shall apply.
- If  the  quality management system is such that it ensures that the devices conform to the type described in the EU type-examination  certificate  and  that  it  conforms  to  the  relevant  provisions  of  this  Regulation,  the  notified  body shall  issue  an  EU  quality  assurance  certificate.  The  notified  body  shall  notify  the  manufacturer  of  its  decision  to issue  the  certificate.  That  decision  shall  contain  the  conclusions  of  the  notified  body's  audit  and  a  reasoned assessment. ## . Section  of Annex IX shall apply.
## 7. Surveillance
Section  ,  the  first,  second  and  fourth  indents  of  Section  ,  Sections  ,  ,    and    of  Annex  IX  shall apply.
In  the  case  of  class  III  devices,  surveillance  shall  also  include  a  check  that  the  quantities  of  produced  or purchased  raw  material  or  crucial  components  approved  for  the  type  and  correspond  to  the  quantities  of finished devices.
- 8. Batch  verification  in  the  case  of  devices  incorporating,  as  an  integral  part,  a  medicinal  substance  which,  if  used separately,  would  be  considered  to be  a  medicinal  product  derived  from  human  blood or human plasma referred to in Article 1(8).
- Upon  completing  the  manufacture  of  each  batch  of  devices  that  incorporate,  as  an  integral  part,  a  medicinal substance  which,  if  used  separately,  would  be  considered  to  be  a  medicinal  product  derived  from  human  blood or  human plasma referred to in the first subparagraph of Article 1(8), the manufacturer shall inform the notified body of  the  release  of  the  batch  of  devices  and  send  it  the  official  certificate  concerning  the  release  of  the  batch of  human  blood  or  plasma  derivative  used  in  the  device,  issued  by  a  Member  State  laboratory  or  a  laboratory designated for  that purpose by a Member State in accordance with Article 114(2) of Directive 2001/83/EC.
## 9. Administrative provisions
The manufacturer or, where the manufacturer does not have a registered place of business in a Member State, its authorised  representative  shall,  for  a  period  ending  no  sooner  than  10  years,  and  in  the  case  of  implantable devices  no  sooner  than  15  years,  after  the  last  device  has  been  placed  on  the  market,  keep  at  the  disposal  of  the competent authorities:
- -  the EU declaration of conformity,
- -  the documentation referred to in the fifth indent of Section  of Annex IX,
- -  the  documentation  referred  to  in  the  eighth  indent  of  Section    of  Annex  IX,  including  the  EU  typeexamination certificate referred to in Annex X,
- -  information on the changes referred to in Section  of Annex IX, and
- -  the decisions and reports from the notified body as referred to in Sections ,  and  of Annex IX.
Section 8 of Annex IX shall apply.
## 10. Application to class IIa devices
- . 