- 5. All  the  information  collated  and  processed  by  Eudamed  shall  be  accessible  to  the  Member  States  and  to  the Commission. The information shall be accessible to notified bodies, economic operators, sponsors and the public to the extent specified in the provisions on the electronic systems referred to in paragraph 2.
The Commission shall ensure that public parts of Eudamed are presented in a user-friendly and easily-searchable format.
- 6. Eudamed shall contain personal data only insofar as necessary for  the electronic systems referred to in paragraph 2 of  this  Article  to  collate  and  process  information  in  accordance  with  this  Regulation.  Personal  data  shall  be  kept  in a form which permits identification of data subjects for periods no longer  than those referred to in Article 10(8).
- 7. The  Commission  and  the  Member  States  shall  ensure  that  data  subjects  may  effectively  exercise  their  rights  to information, of access, to rectification and to object in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 and Directive  95/46/EC,  respectively.  They  shall  also  ensure  that  data  subjects  may  effectively  exercise  the  right  of  access  to data  relating  to  them,  and  the  right  to  have  inaccurate  or  incomplete  data  corrected  and  erased.  Within  their  respective responsibilities,  the  Commission  and  the  Member  States  shall  ensure  that  inaccurate  and  unlawfully  processed  data  are deleted,  in  accordance  with  the  applicable  legislation.  Corrections  and  deletions  shall  be  carried  out  as  soon  as  possible, but no later than 60 days after a request is made by a data subject.
- 8. The  Commission  shall,  by  means  of  implementing  acts,  lay  down  the  detailed  arrangements  necessary  for  the setting  up  and  maintenance  of  Eudamed.  Those  implementing acts shall  be  adopted in  accordance  with  the  examination procedure  referred  to  in  Article  114(3).  When  adopting  those  implementing  acts,  the  Commission  shall  ensure  that,  as far  as  possible,  the  system is  developed  in  such a way as  to avoid  having  to enter  the  same  information twice  within the same module or in different modules of the system.
- 9. In  relation  to  its  responsibilities  under  this  Article  and  the  processing  of  personal  data  involved  therein,  the Commission shall be considered to be the controller of Eudamed and its electronic systems. ## Article 34
## Functionality of Eudamed
- 1. The  Commission  shall,  in  collaboration  with  the  MDCG,  draw  up  the  functional  specifications  for  Eudamed.  The Commission shall draw up a plan for  the  implementation  of  those  specifications  by  26  May  2018.  That  plan  shall  seek to  ensure  that  Eudamed  is  fully  functional  at  a  date  that  allows  the  Commission  to  publish  the  notice  referred  to  in paragraph  3  of  this  Article  by  25  March  2020  and  that  all  other  relevant  deadlines  laid  down  in  Article  123  of  this Regulation and in Article 113 of Regulation (EU) 2017/746 are met.
- 2. The  Commission  shall,  on  the  basis  of  an  independent  audit  report,  inform  the  MDCG  when  it  has  verified  that Eudamed  has  achieved  full  functionality  and  Eudamed  meets  the  functional  specifications  drawn  up  pursuant  to paragraph 1.
- 3. The Commission shall, after consultation with the MDCG and when it is satisfied that the conditions referred to in paragraph 2 have been fulfilled, publish a notice to that effect in the Official Journal of  the European Union .
## CHAPTER IV
## NOTIFIED BODIES
## Article 35
## Authorities responsible for notified bodies
- 1. Any  Member  State  that  intends  to  designate  a  conformity  assessment  body  as  a  notified  body,  or  has  designated a notified body, to carry out conformity assessment activities under  this Regulation shall appoint an authority ('authority responsible  for  notified  bodies'),  which  may  consist  of  separate  constituent  entities  under  national  law  and  shall  be responsible  for  setting  up  and  carrying  out  the  necessary  procedures  for  the  assessment,  designation  and  notification  of conformity  assessment  bodies  and  for  the  monitoring  of  notified  bodies,  including  subcontractors  and  subsidiaries  of those bodies.
- 2. The  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  shall  be  established,  organised  and  operated  so  as  to  safeguard  the objectivity and impartiality of its activities and to avoid any conflicts of interests with conformity assessment bodies.
- 3. The  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  shall  be  organised  in  a  manner  such  that  each  decision  relating  to designation or notification is taken by personnel different from those who carried out the assessment.
- 4. The  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  shall  not  perform  any  activities  that  notified  bodies  perform  on a commercial or competitive basis.
- 5. The authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  shall  safeguard  the  confidential  aspects  of  the  information  it  obtains. However,  it  shall  exchange  information  on  notified  bodies  with  other  Member  States,  the  Commission  and,  when required, with other regulatory authorities.
- 6. The  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  shall  have  a  sufficient  number  of  competent  personnel  permanently available for  the proper performance of its tasks.
Where  the  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  is  a  different  authority  from  the  national  competent  authority  for medical  devices,  it  shall  ensure  that  the  national  authority  responsible  for  medical  devices  is  consulted  on  relevant matters.
- 7. Member  States  shall  make  publicly  available  general  information  on  their  measures  governing  the  assessment, designation and notification of conformity assessment bodies and for  the monitoring of notified bodies, and on changes which have a significant impact on such tasks.
- 8. The  authority responsible for notified bodies shall participate in the peer-review activities provided  for in Article 48. ## Article 36
## Requirements relating to notified bodies
- 1. Notified  bodies  shall  fulfil  the  tasks  for  which  they  are  designated  in  accordance  with  this  Regulation.  They  shall satisfy  the  organisational  and  general  requirements  and  the  quality  management, resource  and  process requirements  that are necessary to fulfil those tasks. In particular, notified bodies shall comply with Annex VII.
In  order  to  meet  the  requirements  referred  to in  the  first  subparagraph,  notified  bodies  shall  have  permanent  availability of  sufficient  administrative,  technical  and  scientific  personnel  in  accordance  with  Section    of  Annex  VII  and personnel  with  relevant  clinical  expertise  in  accordance  with  Section    of  Annex  VII,  where  possible  employed  by the notified body itself.
The  personnel  referred  to  in  Sections    and    of  Annex  VII  shall  be  employed  by  the  notified  body  itself  and shall not be external experts or subcontractors.
- 2. Notified  bodies  shall  make  available  and  submit  upon  request  all  relevant  documentation,  including  the  manufac­ turer's  documentation, to the authority responsible for  notified  bodies to allow it  to conduct its assessment,  designation, notification, monitoring and surveillance activities and to facilitate the assessment outlined in this Chapter.
- 3. In  order  to  ensure  the  uniform  application  of  the  requirements  set  out  in  Annex  VII,  the  Commission  may  adopt implementing  acts,  to  the  extent  necessary  to  resolve  issues  of  divergent  interpretation  and  of  practical  application. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 114(3).
## Article 37
## Subsidiaries and subcontracting
- 1. Where  a  notified  body  subcontracts  specific  tasks  connected  with  conformity  assessment  or  has  recourse  to a  subsidiary  for  specific  tasks  connected  with  conformity  assessment,  it  shall  verify  that  the  subcontractor  or  the subsidiary meets the applicable requirements set out in Annex VII and shall inform the authority responsible for notified bodies accordingly.
- 2. Notified bodies shall take full responsibility for the tasks performed  on  their  behalf by  subcontractors  or subsidiaries.
- 3. Notified bodies shall make publicly available a list of their subsidiaries.
- 4. Conformity  assessment  activities  may  be  subcontracted  or  carried  out  by  a  subsidiary  provided  that  the  legal  or natural person that applied for conformity assessment has been informed accordingly.
- 5. Notified  bodies  shall  keep  at  the  disposal  of  the  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  all  relevant  documents concerning the verification of the qualifications of the subcontractor or  the subsidiary and the work carried out by them under this Regulation.
## Article 38
## Application by conformity assessment bodies for designation
- 1. Conformity assessment bodies  shall  submit  an  application  for  designation  to  the  authority  responsible  for  notified bodies.
- 2. The  application  shall  specify  the  conformity  assessment  activities  as  defined  in  this  Regulation,  and  the  types  of devices  for  which  the  body  is  applying  to  be  designated,  and  shall  be  supported  by  documentation  demonstrating compliance with Annex VII.
In respect of the  organisational  and  general  requirements  and  the  quality  management  requirements  set  out  in Sections  1  and  2  of  Annex  VII,  a  valid  accreditation  certificate  and  the  corresponding  evaluation  report  delivered  by a  national  accreditation  body  in  accordance  with  Regulation  (EC)  No  765/2008  may  be  submitted  and  shall  be  taken into  consideration  during  the  assessment  described  in  Article  39.  However,  the  applicant  shall  make  available  all  the documentation referred to in the first subparagraph to demonstrate compliance with those requirements upon request.
- 3. The notified  body  shall  update  the  documentation  referred  to  in  paragraph  2  whenever  relevant  changes  occur,  in order  to  enable  the  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  to  monitor  and  verify  continuous  compliance  with  all  the requirements set out in Annex VII. ## Article 39
## Assessment of the application
- 1. The  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  shall  within  30  days  check  that  the  application  referred  to  in Article  38  is  complete  and  shall  request  the  applicant  to  provide  any  missing  information.  Once  the  application  is complete that authority shall send it to the Commission.
The  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  shall  review  the  application  and  supporting  documentation  in  accordance with its own procedures and shall draw up a preliminary assessment report.
- 2. The  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  shall  submit  the  preliminary  assessment  report  to  the  Commission which shall immediately transmit it to the MDCG.
- 3. Within 14 days of  the  submission referred  to in paragraph  2  of  this  Article,  the  Commission,  in  conjunction  with the  MDCG,  shall  appoint  a  joint  assessment  team  made  up  of  three  experts,  unless  the  specific  circumstances  require a  different  number  of experts,  chosen  from  the  list  referred  to in  Article  40(2).  One  of  the  experts  shall  be  a  representa­ tive  of  the  Commission  who  shall  coordinate  the  activities  of  the  joint  assessment  team.  The  other  two  experts  shall come from Member States other than the one in which the applicant conformity assessment body is established.
The  joint  assessment  team  shall  be  comprised  of  experts  who  are  competent  to  assess  the  conformity  assessment activities  and  the  types  of  devices  which  are  the  subject  of  the  application  or,  in  particular  when  the  assessment procedure is initiated in accordance with Article 47(3), to ensure that the specific concern can be appropriately assessed.
- 4. Within  90  days  of  its  appointment,  the  joint  assessment  team  shall  review  the  documentation  submitted  with  the application  in  accordance  with  Article  38.  The  joint  assessment  team  may  provide  feedback  to,  or  require  clarification from, the authority responsible for notified bodies on the application and on the planned on-site assessment.
The  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  together  with  the  joint  assessment  team  shall  plan  and  conduct  an  on-site assessment of the applicant conformity assessment body and, where relevant, of any subsidiary or subcontractor, located inside or outside the Union, to be involved in the conformity assessment process.
The on-site assessment of the applicant body shall be led by the authority responsible for notified bodies.
- 5. Findings  regarding  non-compliance  of  an  applicant  conformity  assessment  body  with  the  requirements  set  out  in Annex  VII  shall  be  raised  during  the  assessment  process  and  discussed  between  the  authority  responsible  for  notified bodies  and  the  joint  assessment  team  with  a  view  to  reaching  consensus  and  resolving  any  diverging  opinions,  with respect to the assessment of the application.
At  the  end  of  the  on-site  assessment,  the  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  shall  list  for  the  applicant  conformity assessment  body  the  non-compliances  resulting  from  the  assessment  and  summarise  the  assessment  by  the  joint assessment team.
Within  a specified timeframe,  the applicant conformity  assessment  body  shall  submit  to  the national authority a corrective and preventive action plan to address the non-compliances.
- 6. The joint assessment team shall document any remaining diverging opinions with respect to the assessment within 30 days of completion of the on-site assessment and send them to the authority responsible for notified bodies.
- 7. The authority responsible for notified bodies shall following receipt of a corrective and preventive action plan from the  applicant  body  assess  whether  non-compliances  identified  during  the  assessment  have  been  appropriately  addressed. This  plan  shall  indicate  the  root  cause  of  the  identified  non-compliances  and  shall  include  a  timeframe  for  implemen­ tation of  the actions therein.
The authority responsible for  notified bodies shall having confirmed the corrective and preventive action plan forward it and  its  opinion  thereon  to  the  joint  assessment  team.  The  joint  assessment  team  may  request  of the  authority responsible for notified bodies further clarification and modifications. The authority responsible for notified bodies shall draw up its final assessment report which shall include:
- -  the result of the assessment,
- -  confirmation  that  the  corrective  and  preventive  actions  have  been  appropriately  addressed  and,  where  required, implemented,
- -  any remaining diverging opinion with the joint assessment team, and, where applicable,
- -  the recommended scope of designation.
- 8. The  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  shall  submit  its  final  assessment  report  and,  if  applicable,  the  draft designation to the Commission, the MDCG and the joint assessment team.
- 9. The joint  assessment  team  shall  provide  a  final  opinion  regarding  the  assessment  report  prepared  by  the  authority responsible  for  notified  bodies  and,  if  applicable,  the  draft  designation  within  21  days  of  receipt  of  those  documents  to the  Commission,  which  shall  immediately  submit  that  final  opinion  to  the  MDCG.  Within  42  days  of  receipt  of  the opinion  of  the  joint  assessment  team,  the  MDCG  shall  issue  a  recommendation  with  regard  to  the  draft  designation, which the authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  shall  duly  take  into  consideration  for  its  decision  on  the  designation of  the notified body.
- 10. The  Commission  may,  by  means  of  implementing  acts,  adopt  measures  setting  out  the  detailed  arrangements specifying  procedures and reports for  the application for  designation  referred to in  Article  38  and the  assessment of  the application  set  out  in  this  Article.  Those  implementing  acts  shall  be  adopted  in  accordance  with  the  examination procedure referred to in Article 114(3).
## Article 40
## Nomination of experts for joint assessment of applications for notification
- 1. The  Member  States  and  the  Commission  shall  nominate  experts  qualified  in  the  assessment  of  conformity assessment bodies in the field of medical devices to participate in the activities referred to in Articles 39 and 48.
- 2. The  Commission  shall  maintain  a  list  of  the  experts  nominated  pursuant  to  paragraph  1  of  this  Article,  together with  information  on  their  specific  field  of  competence  and  expertise.  That  list  shall  be  made  available  to  Member  States competent authorities through the electronic system referred to in Article 57.
## Article 41
## Language requirements
- All  documents  required  pursuant  to  Articles  38  and  39  shall  be  drawn  up  in  a  language  or  languages  which  shall  be determined by the Member State concerned.
Member States,  in  applying  the  first  paragraph,  shall  consider  accepting  and  using  a  commonly  understood  language  in the medical field, for all or  part of  the documentation concerned.
The  Commission  shall  provide  translations  of  the  documentation  pursuant  to  Articles  38  and  39,  or  parts  thereof  into an official Union language, such as is necessary for  that documentation to be readily understood by the joint assessment team appointed in accordance with Article 39(3).
## Article 42
## Designation and notification procedure
- 1. Member States may only designate conformity assessment  bodies for  which the assessment pursuant  to Article 39 was completed and which comply with Annex VII.
- 2. Member States shall notify the Commission and the other Member States of the conformity assessment bodies they have  designated,  using  the  electronic  notification  tool  within  the  database  of  notified  bodies  developed  and  managed  by the Commission (NANDO).
- 3. The  notification  shall  clearly  specify,  using  the  codes  referred  to  in  paragraph  13  of  this  Article,  the  scope  of  the designation  indicating  the  conformity  assessment  activities  as  defined  in  this  Regulation  and  the  types  of  devices  which the  notified  body  is  authorised  to  assess  and,  without  prejudice  to  Article  44,  any  conditions  associated  with  the designation. - 4. The  notification  shall  be  accompanied  by  the  final  assessment  report  of  the  authority  responsible  for  notified bodies,  the  final  opinion  of  the  joint  assessment  team  referred  to  in  Article  39(9)  and  the  recommendation  of  the MDCG. Where  the  notifying  Member  State  does  not  follow  the  recommendation  of  the  MDCG,  it  shall  provide  a  duly substantiated justification.
- 5. The  notifying  Member  State  shall,  without  prejudice  to  Article  44,  inform  the  Commission  and  the  other Member  States  of  any  conditions  associated  with  the  designation  and  provide  documentary  evidence  regarding  the arrangements  in  place  to  ensure  that  the  notified  body  will  be  monitored  regularly  and  will  continue  to  satisfy  the requirements set out in Annex VII.
- 6. Within  28  days  of  the  notification  referred  to  in  paragraph  2,  a  Member  State  or  the  Commission  may  raise written  objections,  setting  out  its  arguments,  with  regard  either  to  the  notified  body  or  to  its  monitoring  by  the authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies.  Where  no  objection  is  raised,  the  Commission  shall  publish  in  NANDO  the notification within 42 days of its having been notified as referred to in paragraph 2.
- 7. When a Member State or the Commission raises objections in accordance with paragraph 6, the Commission shall bring  the  matter  before  the  MDCG  within  10  days  of  the  expiry  of  the  period  referred  to  in  paragraph  6.  After consulting  the  parties  involved,  the  MDCG  shall  give  its  opinion  at  the  latest  within  40  days  of  the  matter  having  been brought  before  it.  Where  the  MDCG  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  notification  can  be  accepted,  the  Commission  shall publish in NANDO the notification within 14 days.
- 8. Where the MDCG, after having been consulted in accordance with paragraph 7, confirms the existing objection or raises  another  objection,  the  notifying  Member  State  shall  provide  a  written  response  to  the  MDCG  opinion  within 40  days  of  its  receipt.  The  response  shall  address  the  objections  raised  in  the  opinion,  and  set  out  the  reasons  for  the notifying Member State's decision to designate or not designate the conformity assessment body.
- 9. Where  the  notifying  Member  State  decides  to  uphold  its  decision  to  designate  the  conformity  assessment  body, having  given  its  reasons  in  accordance  with  paragraph  8,  the  Commission  shall  publish  in  NANDO  the  notification within 14 days of being informed thereof.
- 10. When publishing the notification in  NANDO, the Commission shall also add to the electronic  system referred  to in  Article  57  the  information  relating  to  the  notification  of  the  notified  body  along  with  the  documents  mentioned  in paragraph 4 of this Article and the opinion and responses referred to in paragraphs 7 and 8 of this Article.
- 11. The  designation  shall  become  valid  the  day  after  the  notification  is  published  in  NANDO.  The  published notification shall state the scope of  lawful conformity assessment activity of the notified body.
- 12. The  conformity  assessment  body  concerned  may  perform  the  activities  of  a  notified  body  only  after the designation has become valid in accordance with paragraph 11.
- 13. The  Commission  shall  by  26  November  2017,  by  means  of  implementing  acts,  draw  up  a  list  of  codes  and corresponding  types  of  devices  for  the  purpose  of  specifying  the  scope  of  the  designation  of  notified  bodies.  Those implementing  acts  shall  be  adopted  in  accordance  with  the  examination  procedure  referred  to  in  Article  114(3).  The Commission,  after  consulting  the  MDCG,  may  update  this  list  based, inter alia ,  on  information  arising  from  the coordination activities described in Article 48.
## Article 43
## Identification number and list of notified bodies
- 1. The  Commission  shall  assign  an  identification  number  to  each  notified  body  for  which  the  notification  becomes valid  in  accordance  with  Article  42(11).  It  shall  assign  a  single  identification  number  even  when  the  body  is  notified under several Union acts. If  they are successfully designated in accordance with this Regulation, bodies notified pursuant to  Directives  90/385/EEC  and  93/42/EEC  shall  retain  the  identification  number  assigned  to  them  pursuant  to  those Directives.
- 2. The  Commission  shall  make  the  list  of  the  bodies  notified  under  this  Regulation,  including  the  identification numbers that have been assigned to them and the conformity assessment activities as defined in this Regulation and the types  of  devices  for  which  they  have  been  notified,  accessible  to  the  public  in  NANDO.  It  shall  also  make  this  list available on the electronic system referred to in Article 57. The Commission shall ensure that the list is kept up to date. ## Article 44
## Monitoring and re-assessment of notified bodies
- 1. Notified  bodies  shall,  without  delay,  and  at  the  latest  within  15  days,  inform  the  authority  responsible  for  notified bodies of relevant changes which may affect their compliance with the requirements set out in Annex VII or  their ability to conduct the conformity assessment activities relating to the devices for  which they have been designated.
- 2. The  authorities  responsible  for  notified  bodies  shall  monitor  the  notified  bodies  established  on  their  territory  and their  subsidiaries  and  subcontractors  to  ensure  ongoing  compliance  with  the  requirements  and  the  fulfilment  of  its obligations  set  out  in  this  Regulation.  Notified  bodies  shall,  upon  request  by  their  authority  responsible  for  notified bodies,  supply  all  relevant  information  and  documents,  required  to  enable  the  authority,  the  Commission  and  other Member States to verify compliance.
- 3. Where the Commission or the authority of a Member State submits a request to a notified body established on the territory  of  another  Member  State  relating  to  a  conformity  assessment  carried  out  by  that  notified  body,  it  shall  send a  copy  of  that  request  to  the  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  of  that  other  Member  State.  The  notified  body concerned  shall  respond  without  delay  and  within  15  days  at  the  latest  to  the  request.  The  authority  responsible  for notified  bodies  of  the  Member  State  in  which  the  body  is  established  shall  ensure  that  requests  submitted  by  authorities of  any  other  Member  State  or  by  the  Commission  are  resolved  by  the  notified  body  unless  there  is  a  legitimate  reason for  not doing so in which case the matter may be referred to the MDCG.
- 4. At  least  once  a  year,  the  authorities  responsible  for  notified  bodies  shall  re-assess  whether  the  notified  bodies established  on  their  respective  territory  and,  where  appropriate,  the  subsidiaries  and  subcontractors  under  the  responsi­ bility  of  those  notified  bodies  still  satisfy  the  requirements  and  fulfil  their  obligations  set  out  in  Annex  VII.  That  review shall include an on-site audit of each notified body and, where necessary, of its subsidiaries and subcontractors.
The  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  shall  conduct  its  monitoring  and  assessment  activities  according  to  an annual assessment plan to ensure that it can effectively monitor  the continued compliance of  the notified body with the requirements  of  this  Regulation.  That  plan  shall  provide  a  reasoned  schedule  for  the  frequency  of  assessment  of  the notified  body  and,  in  particular,  associated  subsidiaries  and  subcontractors.  The  authority  shall  submit  its  annual  plan for  monitoring or assessment for each notified body for which it is responsible to the MDCG and to the Commission.
- 5. The monitoring of notified  bodies by the authority responsible for  notified  bodies  shall  include  observed  audits  of notified body  personnel,  including where  necessary  any  personnel  from  subsidiaries and  subcontractors, as that personnel is in the process of conducting quality management system assessments at a manufacturer's facility.
- 6. The  monitoring  of  notified  bodies  conducted  by  the  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  shall  consider  data arising from market surveillance, vigilance and post-market surveillance to help guide its activities.
The  authority responsible for notified bodies shall provide for a systematic  follow-up of  complaints  and  other information,  including  from  other  Member  States,  which  may  indicate  non-fulfilment  of  the  obligations  by  a  notified body or its deviation from common or best practice.
- 7. The authority responsible for notified bodies may in addition to regular monitoring or on-site assessments conduct short-notice, unannounced or 'for-cause' reviews if needed to address a particular issue or  to verify compliance.
- 8. The  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  shall  review  the  assessments  by  notified  bodies  of  manufacturers' technical documentation, in particular  the clinical evaluation documentation as further outlined in Article 45.
- 9. The authority responsible for  notified  bodies shall document and record any findings regarding non-compliance of the notified body with the requirements set out in Annex VII and shall monitor  the timely implementation of corrective and preventive actions.
- 10. Three years  after  notification  of  a  notified  body,  and  again  every  fourth  year  thereafter,  a  complete  re-assessment to  determine  whether  the  notified  body  still  satisfies  the  requirements  set  out  in  Annex  VII  shall  be  conducted  by  the authority responsible for  notified bodies of  the Member State in which the body is established and by a joint assessment team appointed for the purpose of the procedure described in Articles 38 and 39. - 11. The  Commission  is  empowered  to  adopt  delegated  acts  in  accordance  with  Article  115  in  order  to  amend paragraph 10 to modify the frequency at which the complete re-assessment referred to in that paragraph is to be carried out.
- 12. The  Member  States  shall  report  to  the  Commission  and  to  the  MDCG,  at  least  once  a  year,  on  their  monitoring and  on-site  assessment  activities  regarding  notified  bodies  and,  where  applicable,  subsidiaries  and  subcontractors.  The report  shall  provide  details  of  the  outcome  of  those  activities,  including  activities  pursuant  to  paragraph  7,  and  shall  be treated  as  confidential  by  the  MDCG  and  the  Commission;  however  it  shall  contain  a  summary  which  shall  be  made publicly available.
The summary of the report shall be uploaded to the electronic system referred to in Article 57.
## Article 45
## Review of notified body assessment of technical documentation and clinical evaluation documentation
- 1. The authority responsible  for  notified  bodies,  as  part  of  its  ongoing  monitoring  of  notified  bodies,  shall  review  an appropriate  number  of  notified  body  assessments  of  manufacturers'  technical  documentation,  in  particular  the  clinical evaluation documentation as referred to in points (c) and (d)  of  Section   of  Annex  II  to verify  the  conclusions  drawn by the  notified  body  based  on  the  information  presented  by  the  manufacturer.  The  reviews  by  the  authority  responsible for  notified bodies shall be conducted both off-site and on-site.
- 2. The  sampling  of  files  to  be  reviewed  in  accordance  with  paragraph  1  shall  be  planned  and  representative  of  the types and risk of devices certified  by the  notified  body,  in particular  high-risk  devices,  and  be appropriately  justified  and documented  in  a  sampling  plan,  which  shall  be  made  available  by  the  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  to  the MDCG upon request.
- 3. The  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  shall  review  whether  the  assessment  by  the  notified  body  was conducted  appropriately  and  shall  check  the  procedures  used,  associated  documentation  and  the  conclusions  drawn  by the notified  body. Such checking shall include the technical documentation and clinical evaluation documentation of  the manufacturer upon which the notified body has based its assessment. Such reviews shall be conducted utilising CS.
- 4. Those  reviews  shall  also  form  part  of  the  re-assessment  of  notified  bodies  in  accordance  with  Article  44(10)  and the joint assessment activities referred to in Article 47(3). The reviews shall be conducted utilising appropriate expertise.
- 5. Based  on  the  reports  of  the  reviews  and  assessments  by  the  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  or  joint assessment  teams,  on  input  from  the  market  surveillance,  vigilance  and  post-market  surveillance  activities  described  in Chapter  VII,  on  the  continuous  monitoring  of  technical  progress,  or  on  the  identification  of  concerns  and  emerging issues  concerning  the  safety  and  performance  of  devices,  the  MDCG  may  recommend  that  the  sampling,  carried  out under  this  Article,  cover  a  greater  or  lesser  proportion  of  the  technical  documentation  and  clinical  evaluation  documen­ tation assessed by a notified body.
- 6. The  Commission  may,  by  means  of  implementing  acts,  adopt  measures  setting  out  the  detailed  arrangements, associated  documents  for,  and  coordination  of,  the  review  of  assessments  of  technical  documentation  and  clinical evaluation  documentation,  as  referred  to  in  this  Article.  Those  implementing  acts  shall  be  adopted  in  accordance  with the examination procedure referred to in Article 114(3).
## Article 46
## Changes to designations and notifications
- 1. The  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  shall  notify  the  Commission  and  the  other  Member  States  of  any relevant changes to the designation of a notified body.
The procedures described in Article 39 and in Article 42 shall apply to extensions of the scope of the designation.
For changes to the designation other  than extensions of its scope, the procedures laid down in the following paragraphs shall apply. - 2. The  Commission shall immediately publish the amended  notification in NANDO.  The  Commission  shall immediately  enter  information  on  the  changes  to  the  designation  of  the  notified  body  in  the  electronic  system  referred to in Article 57.
- 3. Where a notified body decides to cease its conformity assessment activities it shall inform the authority responsible for  notified  bodies  and  the  manufacturers concerned as soon as possible and in the case of a planned cessation one year before  ceasing  its  activities.  The  certificates  may  remain  valid  for  a  temporary  period  of  nine  months  after  cessation  of the  notified  body's  activities  on  condition  that  another  notified  body  has  confirmed  in  writing  that  it  will  assume responsibilities  for  the  devices  covered  by  those  certificates.  The  new  notified  body  shall  complete  a  full  assessment  of the  devices  affected  by  the  end  of  that  period  before  issuing  new  certificates  for  those  devices.  Where  the  notified  body has ceased its activity, the authority responsible for notified bodies shall withdraw the designation.
- 4. Where  a  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  has  ascertained  that  a  notified  body  no  longer  meets  the requirements  set  out  in  Annex  VII,  or  that  it  is  failing  to  fulfil  its  obligations  or  has  not  implemented  the  necessary corrective  measures,  the  authority  shall  suspend,  restrict,  or  fully  or  partially  withdraw  the  designation,  depending  on the  seriousness  of  the  failure  to  meet  those  requirements  or  fulfil  those  obligations.  A  suspension  shall  not  exceed a period of one year, renewable once for  the same period.
The authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  shall  immediately  inform  the  Commission  and  the  other  Member  States of any suspension, restriction or  withdrawal of a designation.
- 5. Where  its  designation  has  been  suspended,  restricted,  or  fully  or  partially  withdrawn,  the  notified  body  shall inform the manufacturers concerned at the latest within 10 days.
- 6. In  the  event  of  restriction,  suspension  or  withdrawal  of a  designation,  the  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies shall  take  appropriate  steps  to  ensure  that  the  files  of  the  notified  body  concerned  are  kept  and  make  them  available  to authorities  in  other  Member  States  responsible  for  notified  bodies  and  to  authorities  responsible  for  market  surveillance at their  request.
- 7. In  the  event  of  restriction,  suspension  or  withdrawal  of a  designation,  the  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies shall:
- (a)   assess  the impact on the certificates issued by the notified body;
- (b)   submit  a  report  on  its  findings  to  the  Commission  and  the  other  Member  States  within  three  months  of  having notified the changes to the designation;
- (c)   require  the  notified  body  to  suspend  or  withdraw,  within  a  reasonable  period  of  time  determined  by  the  authority, any certificates which were unduly issued to ensure the safety of devices on the market;
- (d)   enter  into  the  electronic  system  referred  to  in  Article  57  information  in  relation  to  certificates  of  which  it  has required their suspension or  withdrawal;
- (e)   inform  the  competent  authority  for  medical  devices  of  the  Member  State  in  which  the  manufacturer  has  its registered place of business through the electronic system referred to in Article 57 of the certificates for  which it has required  suspension  or  withdrawal.  That  competent  authority  shall  take  the  appropriate  measures,  where  necessary to avoid a potential risk to the health or safety of patients, users or others.
- 8. With  the  exception  of  certificates  unduly  issued,  and  where  a  designation  has  been  suspended  or  restricted,  the certificates shall remain valid in the following circumstances:
- (a)   the  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  has  confirmed,  within  one  month  of  the  suspension  or  restriction,  that there  is  no  safety  issue  in  relation  to  certificates  affected  by  the  suspension  or  restriction,  and  the  authority responsible  for notified bodies  has  outlined  a  timeline  and  actions  anticipated  to  remedy  the  suspension  or restriction; or
- (b)   the  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  has  confirmed  that  no  certificates  relevant  to  the  suspension  will  be issued, amended or re-issued during the course of the suspension or restriction, and states whether  the notified body has  the  capability  of  continuing  to  monitor  and  remain  responsible  for  existing  certificates  issued  for  the  period  of the  suspension  or  restriction.  In  the  event  that  the  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  determines  that  the notified  body  does  not  have  the  capability  to  support  existing  certificates  issued,  the  manufacturer  shall  provide,  to the  competent  authority  for  medical  devices  of  the  Member  State  in  which  the  manufacturer  of  the  device  covered by the  certificate  has  its  registered  place  of  business,  within  three  months  of  the  suspension  or  restriction,  a  written confirmation  that  another  qualified  notified  body  is  temporarily  assuming  the  functions  of  the  notified  body  to monitor and remain responsible for the certificates during the period of suspension or restriction. - 9. With the exception of certificates unduly issued, and where a designation has been withdrawn, the certificates shall remain valid for a period of nine months in the following circumstances:
- (a)   where  the  competent  authority  for  medical  devices  of  the  Member  State  in  which  the  manufacturer  of  the  device covered  by  the  certificate  has  its  registered  place  of  business  has  confirmed  that  there  is  no  safety  issue  associated with the devices in question; and
- (b)   another  notified  body  has  confirmed  in  writing  that  it  will  assume  immediate  responsibilities  for  those  devices  and will have completed assessment of them within twelve months of the withdrawal of the designation.
In the circumstances  referred to in the first  subparagraph,  the  competent  authority  for medical  devices of the Member State in which the manufacturer of the device covered by the certificate has its place of business may extend the provisional validity of the certificates for further periods of three months, which altogether shall not exceed twelve months.
The  authority  or  the  notified  body  assuming  the  functions  of  the  notified  body  affected  by  the  change  of  designation shall immediately inform the Commission, the other Member States and the other notified bodies thereof.
## Article 47
## Challenge to the competence of notified bodies
- 1. The  Commission, in  conjunction  with  the  MDCG,  shall  investigate  all  cases  where  concerns  have  been  brought  to its  attention  regarding  the  continued  fulfilment  by  a  notified  body,  or  of  one  or  more  of  its  subsidiaries  or  subcon­ tractors,  of  the  requirements  set  out  in  Annex  VII  or  the  obligations  to  which  they  are  subject.  It  shall  ensure  that  the relevant authority responsible for notified bodies is informed and is given an opportunity to investigate those concerns.
- 2. 