Information regarding the acceptance and performance testing, the acceptance criteria, and the maintenance procedure shall also be specified.
## . Intended radiation
- (a)   Where  devices  are  designed  to  emit  hazardous,  or  potentially  hazardous,  levels  of  ionizing  and/or  nonionizing  radiation  necessary  for  a  specific  medical  purpose  the  benefit  of  which  is  considered  to  outweigh the  risks  inherent  to  the  emission,  it  shall  be  possible  for  the  user  to  control  the  emissions.  Such  devices shall  be  designed  and  manufactured  to  ensure  reproducibility  of  relevant  variable  parameters  within  an acceptable tolerance.
- (b)   Where  devices  are  intended  to  emit  hazardous,  or  potentially  hazardous,  ionizing  and/or  non-ionizing radiation, they  shall be fitted,  where  possible,  with  visual  displays  and/or  audible  warnings  of  such emissions.
- . Devices shall be designed and manufactured in such a way that exposure of patients, users and other persons to the  emission  of  unintended,  stray  or  scattered  radiation  is  reduced  as  far  as  possible.  Where  possible  and appropriate,  methods  shall  be  selected  which  reduce  the  exposure  to  radiation  of  patients,  users  and  other persons who may be affected.
## . Ionising radiation
- (a)   Devices  intended  to  emit  ionizing  radiation  shall  be  designed  and  manufactured  taking  into  account  the requirements  of  the  Directive  2013/59/Euratom  laying  down  basic  safety  standards  for  protection  against the dangers arising from exposure to ionising radiation.
- (b)   Devices  intended  to  emit  ionising  radiation  shall  be  designed  and  manufactured  in  such  a  way  as  to  ensure that,  where  possible,  taking  into  account  the  intended  use,  the  quantity,  geometry  and  quality  of  the radiation emitted can be varied and controlled, and, if possible, monitored during treatment.
- (c)   Devices  emitting  ionising  radiation intended for diagnostic radiology shall be designed and manufactured in such  a  way  as  to  achieve  an  image  and/or  output  quality  that  are  appropriate  to  the  intended  medical purpose whilst minimising radiation exposure of the patient and user.
- (d)   Devices  that  emit  ionising  radiation  and  are  intended  for  therapeutic  radiology  shall  be  designed  and manufactured  in  such  a  way  as  to  enable  reliable  monitoring  and  control  of  the  delivered  dose,  the  beam type, energy and, where appropriate, the quality of radiation.
- 17. Electronic  programmable  systems  -  devices  that  incorporate  electronic  programmable  systems  and  software that are devices in themselves
- . Devices  that  incorporate  electronic  programmable  systems,  including  software,  or  software  that  are  devices  in themselves, shall be designed to ensure repeatability, reliability and performance in line with their  intended use. In  the  event  of  a  single  fault  condition,  appropriate  means  shall  be  adopted  to  eliminate  or  reduce  as  far  as possible consequent risks or impairment of performance.
- . 