For  class  IIa  devices  the  notified  body  shall  assess,  as  part  of  the  assessment  referred  to  in  Section  ,  whether the  technical  documentation as  referred  to in  Annexes  II  and  III  for  the  devices  selected  on  a  representative  basis is  compliant with this Regulation.
- In  choosing  a  representative  sample  or  samples  of  devices,  the  notified  body  shall  take  into  account  the  novelty of  the  technology,  similarities  in  design,  technology,  manufacturing  and  sterilisation  methods,  the  intended  use and  the  results  of  any  previous  relevant  assessments  (e.g.  with  regard  to  physical,  chemical,  biological  or  clinical properties)  that  have  been  carried  out  in  accordance  with  this  Regulation.  The  notified  body  shall  document  its rationale for  the sample or samples of devices taken. - . Where  the  assessment  under  Section  .  confirms  that  the  class  IIa  devices  in  question  conform  to  the technical  documentation  referred  to  in  Annexes  II  and  III  and  meet  the  requirements  of  this  Regulation  which apply to them, the notified body shall issue a certificate pursuant to this Part of this Annex.
- . Samples  additional  to  those  taken  for  the  initial  conformity  assessment  of  devices  shall  be  assessed  by  the notified body as part of the surveillance assessment referred to in Section 7.
- . By way of derogation from Section 6, the manufacturer or  its authorised representative shall, for a period ending no  sooner  than  10  years  after  the  last  device  has  been  placed  on  the  market,  keep  at  the  disposal  of  the competent authorities:
- -  the EU declaration of conformity,
- -  the technical documentation referred to in Annexes II and III, and
- -  the certificate referred to in Section .
Section 8 of Annex IX shall apply.
## PART B
## PRODUCT VERIFICATION
- 11. Product  verification  shall  be  understood  to  be  the  procedure  whereby  after  examination  of  every  manufactured device,  the  manufacturer,  by  issuing  an  EU  declaration  of  conformity  in  accordance  with  Article  19  and Annex IV, shall be deemed to ensure and to declare that the devices which have been subject to the procedure set out  in  Sections  14  and  15  conform  to  the  type  described  in  the  EU  type-examination  certificate  and  meet  the requirements of this Regulation which apply to them.
- 12. The  manufacturer  shall  take  all  the  measures  necessary  to  ensure  that  the  manufacturing  process  produces devices  which  conform  to  the  type  described  in  the  EU  type-examination  certificate  and  to  the  requirements  of the Regulation which apply to them. Prior  to the start of manufacture, the manufacturer shall prepare documents defining  the  manufacturing  process,  in  particular  as  regards  sterilisation  where  necessary,  together  with  all routine, pre-established procedures to be implemented to ensure homogeneous production and, where appropriate,  conformity  of  the  devices  with  the  type  described  in  the  EU  type-examination  certificate  and  with the requirements of this Regulation which apply to them.
- In addition, for devices placed on the market in a sterile condition, and only for  those aspects of the manufactur­ ing  process  designed  to  secure  and  maintain  sterility,  the  manufacturer  shall  apply  the  provisions  of  Sections  6 and 7.
- 13. The  manufacturer  shall  undertake  to  institute  and  keep  up  to  date  a  post-market  surveillance  plan,  including a  PMCF  plan,  and  the  procedures  ensuring  compliance  with  the  obligations  of  the  manufacturer  resulting  from the provisions on vigilance and post-market surveillance system set out in Chapter VII.
- 14. The notified  body shall carry out the appropriate examinations and tests in order  to verify the conformity of  the device with the  requirements of the  Regulation by  examining  and  testing  every product  as specified in Section 15.
- The  examinations  and  tests  referred  to  in  the  first  paragraph  of  this  Section  shall  not  apply  to  aspects  of  the manufacturing process designed to secure sterility.
- 15. Verification by examination and testing of every product
- . Every  device  shall  be  examined  individually  and  the  appropriate  physical  or  laboratory  tests  as  defined  in  the relevant standard or standards referred to in Article 8, or equivalent tests and assessments, shall be carried out in order  to  verify,  where  appropriate,  the  conformity  of  the  devices  with  the  type  described  in  the  EU  typeexamination certificate and with the requirements of this Regulation which apply to them.
- . The  notified  body  shall  affix,  or  have  affixed,  its  identification  number  to  each  approved  device  and  shall  draw up an EU product verification certificate relating to the tests and assessments carried out.
- 16. Batch  verification  in  the  case  of  devices  incorporating,  as  an  integral  part,  a  medicinal  substance  which,  if  used separately,  would  be  considered  to be  a  medicinal  product  derived  from  human  blood or human plasma referred to in Article 1(8).
- Upon  completing  the  manufacture  of  each  batch  of  devices  that  incorporate,  as  an  integral  part,  a  medicinal substance  which,  if  used  separately,  would  be  considered  to  be  a  medicinal  product  derived  from  human  blood or  human plasma referred to in the first subparagraph of Article 1(8), the manufacturer shall inform the notified body of  the  release  of  the  batch  of  devices  and  send  it  the  official  certificate  concerning  the  release  of  the  batch of  human  blood  or  plasma  derivative  used  in  the  device,  issued  by  a  Member  State  laboratory  or  a  laboratory designated for  that purpose by a Member State in accordance with Article 114(2) of Directive 2001/83/EC.
## 17. Administrative provisions
- The manufacturer or  its  authorised  representative  shall,  for  a  period  ending  no  sooner  than  10  years,  and  in  the case of  implantable devices no sooner  than 15 years, after  the last device has been placed on the market, keep at the disposal of the competent authorities:
- -  the EU declaration of conformity,
- -  the documentation referred to in Section 12,
- -  the certificate referred to in Section , and
- -  the EU type-examination certificate referred to in Annex X.
Section 8 of Annex IX shall apply.
- 18. Application to class IIa devices
- . By  way  of  derogation  from  Section  11,  by  virtue  of  the  EU  declaration  of  conformity  the  manufacturer  shall  be deemed  to  ensure  and  to  declare  that  the  class  IIa  devices  in  question  are  manufactured  in  conformity  with  the technical  documentation  referred  to  in  Annexes  II  and  III  and  meet  the  requirements  of  this  Regulation  which apply to them.
