In cases where the manufacturer has no registered place of business in the Union and has  not  yet  designated  an  authorised  representative,  the  matter  shall  be  referred  to  the  competent  authority  of  the Member  State  in  which  the  authorised  representative referred to in the last indent  of point (b) of the  second paragraph  of  Section    of  Annex  IX  has  its  registered  place  of  business.  Where  the  notified  body  concerned  is established in a Member State other  than that of  the manufacturer, the competent authority shall adopt its decision after consultation with the competent authority of the Member State that designated the notified body.
The competent authority of  the Member State in which the manufacturer has its registered place of business shall notify the MDCG and the Commission of its decision. The decision shall be made available upon request.
- 3. At  the  request  of  a  Member  State  the  Commission  shall  after  consulting  the  MDCG,  decide,  by  means  of implementing acts, on the following:
- (a) application of Annex VIII to a given device, or category or group of devices, with a view to determining the classifi­ cation of such devices;
- (b)   that  a  device,  or  category or  group  of  devices,  shall  for  reasons  of  public  health  based  on  new  scientific  evidence,  or based  on  any  information  which  becomes  available  in  the  course  of  the  vigilance  and  market  surveillance  activities be reclassified, by way of derogation from Annex VIII.
- 4. The Commission  may  also, on its own  initiative and after consulting the MDCG,  decide, by  means of implementing acts, on the issues referred to in points (a) and (b) of paragraph 3.
- 5. In  order  to  ensure  the  uniform  application  of  Annex  VIII,  and  taking  account  of  the  relevant  scientific  opinions  of the  relevant  scientific  committees,  the  Commission  may  adopt  implementing  acts  to  the  extent  necessary  to  resolve issues of divergent interpretation and of practical application.
- 6. The implementing acts referred to in paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 of  this Article shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 114(3).
## SECTION 2
## Conformity assessment
Article 52
## Conformity assessment procedures
- 1. Prior  to  placing  a  device  on  the  market,  manufacturers  shall  undertake  an  assessment  of  the  conformity  of  that device, in accordance with the applicable conformity assessment procedures set out in Annexes IX to XI.
- 2. Prior to  putting  into  service  a  device  that  is  not  placed  on  the  market,  manufacturers  shall  undertake  an assessment of the conformity of that device, in accordance with the applicable conformity assessment procedures set out in Annexes IX to XI.
- 3. Manufacturers of class III devices, other than  custom-made  or investigational devices, shall be subject to a  conformity  assessment  as  specified  in  Annex  IX.  Alternatively,  the  manufacturer  may  choose  to  apply  a  conformity assessment as specified in Annex X coupled with a conformity assessment as specified in Annex XI.
- 4. Manufacturers  of class IIb devices, other than custom-made  or  investigational devices, shall be subject to a  conformity  assessment  as  specified  in  Chapters  I  and  III  of  Annex  IX,  and  including  an  assessment  of  the  technical documentation as specified in Section 4 of that Annex of at least one representative device per generic device group.
However,  for  class  IIb  implantable  devices,  except  sutures,  staples,  dental  fillings,  dental  braces,  tooth  crowns,  screws, wedges, plates, wires, pins, clips and connectors, the assessment of  the technical documentation as specified in Section 4 of Annex IX shall apply for every device.
Alternatively,  the  manufacturer  may choose to apply a conformity assessment based on type examination as specified in Annex X coupled with a conformity assessment based on product conformity verification as specified in Annex XI. - 5. Where justified  in view of well-established technologies,  similar  to those  used in  the  exempted  devices listed in the second subparagraph of paragraph 4 of  this Article,  being used  in  other  class  IIb  implantable  devices,  or  where  justified in  order  to  protect  the  health  and  safety  of  patients,  users  or  other  persons  or  other  aspects  of  public  health,  the Commission  is  empowered  to  adopt  delegated  acts  in  accordance  with  Article  115  to  amend  that  list  by  adding  other types of class IIb implantable devices to that list or removing devices therefrom.
- 6. Manufacturers of class IIa devices, other than custom-made  or  investigational devices, shall be subject to a  conformity  assessment  as  specified  in  Chapters  I  and  III  of  Annex  IX,  and  including  an  assessment  of  the  technical documentation as specified in Section 4 of that Annex of at least one representative device for each category of devices.
Alternatively,  the  manufacturer  may  choose  to  draw  up  the  technical  documentation  set  out  in  Annexes  II  and  III coupled  with  a  conformity  assessment  as  specified  in  Section  10  or  Section  18  of  Annex  XI.  The  assessment  of  the technical documentation shall apply for at least one representative device for each category of devices.
- 7. Manufacturers of class I devices, other  than custom-made or  investigational devices, shall declare the conformity of their  products  by  issuing  the  EU  declaration  of  conformity  referred  to  in  Article  19  after  drawing  up  the  technical documentation  set  out  in  Annexes  II  and  III.  If  those  devices  are  placed  on  the  market  in  sterile  condition,  have a  measuring  function  or  are  reusable  surgical  instruments,  the  manufacturer  shall  apply  the  procedures  set  out  in Chapters  I  and  III  of  Annex  IX,  or  in  Part  A  of  Annex  XI.  However,  the  involvement  of  the  notified  body  in  those procedures shall be limited:
- (a)   in  the  case  of  devices  placed  on  the  market  in  sterile  condition,  to  the  aspects  relating  to  establishing,  securing  and maintaining sterile conditions;
- (b)   in  the  case  of  devices  with  a  measuring  function,  to  the  aspects  relating  to  the  conformity  of  the  devices  with  the metrological requirements;
- (c)   in  the  case  of  reusable  surgical  instruments,  to  the  aspects  relating  to  the  reuse  of  the  device,  in  particular  cleaning, disinfection, sterilization, maintenance and functional testing and the related instructions for use.
- 8. Manufacturers of custom-made devices shall follow the procedure set out in Annex XIII and draw up the statement set out in Section 1 of that Annex before placing such devices on the market.
In  addition  to  the  procedure  applicable  pursuant  to  the  first  subparagraph,  manufacturers  of  class  III  custom-made implantable  devices  shall  be  subject  to  the  conformity  assessment  as  specified  in  Chapter  I  of  Annex  IX.  Alternatively, the manufacturer may choose to apply a conformity assessment as specified in Part A of Annex XI.
- 9. In  addition  to  the  procedures  applicable  pursuant  to  paragraph  3,  4,  6,  or  7  of  this  Article,  in  the  case  of  devices referred  to  in  the  first  subparagraph  of  Article  1(8),  the  procedure  specified  in  Section    of  Annex  IX  or  Section  6  of Annex X, as applicable, shall also apply.
- 10. In  addition  to  the  procedures  applicable  pursuant  to paragraph 3,  4,  6,  or  7  of  this  Article,  in  the  case  of  devices that  are  covered  by  this  Regulation  in  accordance  with  point  (f)  or  (g)  of  Article  1(6)  and  with  the  first  subparagraph  of Article  1(10),  the  procedure  specified  in  Section    of  Annex  IX  or  Section  6  of  Annex  X,  as  applicable,  shall  also apply.
- 11. In  addition  to  the  procedures  applicable  pursuant  to  paragraph  3,  4,  6,  or  7,  in  the  case  of  devices  that  are composed of  substances  or  of  combinations  of  substances  that  are  intended  to  be  introduced  into  the  human  body  via a  body  orifice  or  applied  to  the  skin  and  that  are  absorbed  by  or  locally  dispersed  in  the  human  body,  the  procedure specified in Section  of Annex IX or Section 6 of Annex X, as applicable, shall also apply.
- 12. The  Member State in  which  the  notified  body  is  established  may  require  that  all  or  certain  documents,  including the technical  documentation,  audit,  assessment  and  inspection  reports,  relating to the procedures  referred  to  in paragraphs  1  to  7  and  9  to  11  be  made  available  in  an  official  Union  language(s)  determined  by  that  Member  State.  In the  absence  of  such  requirement,  those  documents  shall  be  available  in  any  official  Union  language  acceptable  to  the notified body. - 14. The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, specify detailed arrangements and procedural aspects with a  view  to  ensuring  the  harmonised  application  of  the  conformity  assessment  procedures  by  the  notified  bodies  for  any of  the following aspects:
- (a)   the  frequency  and  the  sampling  basis  of  the  assessment  of  the  technical  documentation  on  a  representative  basis  as set  out  in  the  third  paragraph  of  Section    and  in  Section    of  Annex  IX  in  the  case  of  class  IIa  and  class  IIb devices, and in Section  of Annex XI in the case of class IIa devices;
- (b)   the  minimum  frequency  of  unannounced  on-site  audits  and  sample  tests  to  be  conducted  by  notified  bodies  in accordance with Section  of Annex IX, taking into account the risk-class and the type of device;
- (c)   the  physical,  laboratory or  other  tests  to  be  carried  out  by  notified  bodies  in  the  context  of  sample  tests,  assessment of  the  technical  documentation  and  type  examination  in  accordance  with  Sections    and    of  Annex  IX, Section 3 of Annex X and Section 15 of Annex XI.
The  implementing  acts  referred  to  in  the  first  subparagraph  shall  be  adopted  in  accordance  with  the  examination procedure referred to in Article 114(3).
## Article 53
## Involvement of notified bodies in conformity assessment procedures
- 1. Where  the  conformity  assessment  procedure  requires  the  involvement  of  a  notified  body,  the  manufacturer  may apply  to  a  notified  body  of  its  choice,  provided  that  the  chosen  notified  body  is  designated  for  conformity  assessment activities  related  to  the  types  of  devices  concerned.  The  manufacturer  may  not  lodge  an  application  in  parallel  with another notified body for the same conformity assessment procedure.
- 2. The  notified  body  concerned  shall,  by  means  of  the  electronic  system  referred  to  in  Article  57,  inform  the  other notified  bodies  of  any  manufacturer  that  withdraws  its  application  prior  to  the  notified  body's  decision  regarding  the conformity assessment.
- 3. When  applying  to  a  notified  body  under  paragraph  1,  manufacturers  shall  declare  whether  they  have  withdrawn an application with another notified body prior  to the decision of  that notified body and provide information about any previous application for  the same conformity assessment that has been refused by another notified body.
- 4. The  notified  body  may  require  any  information  or  data  from  the  manufacturer,  which  is  necessary  in  order  to properly conduct the chosen conformity assessment procedure.
- 5. Notified  bodies  and  the  personnel  of  notified  bodies  shall  carry out  their  conformity  assessment  activities  with  the highest  degree  of  professional  integrity  and  the  requisite  technical  and  scientific  competence  in  the  specific  field  and shall  be  free  from  all  pressures  and  inducements,  particularly  financial,  which  might  influence  their  judgement  or  the results  of  their  conformity  assessment  activities,  especially  as  regards persons  or  groups  with  an  interest  in  the  results  of those activities.
## Article 54
## Clinical evaluation consultation procedure for certain class III and class IIb devices
- 1. In  addition  to  the  procedures  applicable  pursuant  to  Article  52,  a  notified  body  shall  also  follow  the  procedure regarding  clinical  evaluation  consultation  as  specified  in  Section    of  Annex  IX  or  as  referred  to  in  Section  6  of Annex X, as applicable, when performing a conformity assessment of the following devices:
- (a)   class  III  implantable devices, and
- (b)   class  IIb  active  devices  intended  to  administer  and/or  remove  a  medicinal  product,  as  referred  to  in  Section    of Annex VIII (Rule 12).
- 2. The procedure referred to in paragraph 1 shall not be required for the devices referred to therein:
- (a)   in  the  case  of  renewal  of a certificate issued under  this Regulation; - (b)   where  the  device  has  been  designed  by modifying a  device  already  marketed  by the  same  manufacturer  for  the  same intended purpose, provided that  the  manufacturer has  demonstrated to the  satisfaction  of  the  notified  body  that  the modifications do not adversely affect the benefit-risk ratio of the device; or
- (c)   where  the  principles  of  the  clinical  evaluation  of  the  device  type  or  category  have been  addressed in  a  CS  referred  to in  Article  9  and  the  notified  body  confirms  that  the  clinical  evaluation  of  the  manufacturer  for  this  device  is  in compliance with the relevant CS for clinical evaluation of that kind of device.
- 3. The  notified  body  shall  notify  the  competent  authorities,  the  authority  responsible  for  notified  bodies  and  the Commission  through  the  electronic  system  referred  to  in  Article  57  of  whether  or  not  the  procedure  referred  to  in paragraph 1 of  this Article is  to be  applied. That notification shall  be accompanied by the clinical evaluation assessment report.
- 4. The Commission shall draw up an annual overview of devices which have been subject  to the procedure  specified in  Section    of  Annex  IX  and  referred  to  in  Section  6  of  Annex  X.  The  annual  overview  shall  include  the  notifications in  accordance with paragraph 3 of  this Article and point (e) of Section  of Annex IX and a listing of  the cases where the  notified  body  did  not  follow  the  advice  from  the  expert  panel.  