## Article 119
## Amendment to Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009
In Article 2 of Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009, the following paragraph is added:
- '4. The Commission may, at the request of a Member State or on its own initiative, adopt the necessary measures to  determine  whether  or  not  a  specific  product  or  group  of  products  falls  within  the  definition  'cosmetic  product'. Those measures shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 32(2).'.
## Article 120
## Transitional provisions
- 1. From  26  May  2020,  any  publication  of  a notification in respect of a notified body  in  accordance with Directives 90/385/EEC and 93/42/EEC shall become void.
- 2. Certificates  issued  by  notified  bodies  in  accordance  with  Directives  90/385/EEC  and  93/42/EEC  prior  to  25  May 2017  shall  remain  valid  until  the  end  of  the  period  indicated  on  the  certificate,  except  for  certificates  issued  in accordance with Annex 4 to Directive 90/385/EEC or Annex IV to Directive 93/42/EEC which shall become void at the latest on 27 May 2022.
Certificates issued by notified bodies in accordance with Directives 90/385/EEC and 93/42/EEC from 25 May 2017 shall remain valid  until  the  end  of  the  period  indicated  on  the  certificate,  which  shall  not  exceed  five  years  from  its  issuance. They shall however become void at the latest on 27 May 2024.
- 3. By  way  of  derogation  from  Article  5  of  this  Regulation,  a  device  with  a  certificate  that  was  issued  in  accordance with Directive  90/385/EEC or Directive  93/42/EEC and which is valid by virtue of paragraph 2 of  this Article may only be placed on the market or  put into service provided that from the date of application of  this Regulation it continues to comply  with  either  of  those  Directives,  and  provided  there  are  no  significant  changes  in  the  design  and  intended purpose.  However,  the requirements  of this Regulation relating to post-market  surveillance, market  surveillance, vigilance,  registration  of  economic  operators  and  of  devices  shall  apply  in  place  of  the  corresponding  requirements  in those Directives.
Without prejudice to Chapter IV and paragraph 1 of  this Article,  the  notified  body  that  issued  the  certificate  referred  to in  the  first  subparagraph  shall  continue  to  be  responsible  for  the  appropriate  surveillance  in  respect  of  all  of  the applicable requirements relating to the devices it has certified.
- 4. Devices  lawfully  placed  on  the  market  pursuant  to  Directives  90/385/EEC  and  93/42/EEC  prior  to  26  May  2020, and  devices  placed  on  the  market  from  26  May  2020  by  virtue  of  a  certificate  as  referred  to  in  paragraph  2  of  this Article, may continue to be made available on the market or put into service until 27 May 2025.
- 5. By way of derogation from Directives 90/385/EEC and 93/42/EEC, devices which comply with this Regulation may be placed on the market prior to 26 May 2020.
- 6. By  way  of  derogation  from  Directives  90/385/EEC  and  93/42/EEC,  conformity  assessment  bodies  which  comply with  this  Regulation  may  be  designated  and  notified  prior  26  May  2020.  Notified  bodies  which  are  designated  and notified  in  accordance  with  this  Regulation  may  carry  out  the  conformity  assessment  procedures  laid  down  in  this Regulation and issue certificates in accordance with this Regulation prior  to 26 May 2020. - 7. As  regards  devices  subject  to  the  consultation  procedure  laid  down  in  Article  54,  paragraph  5  of  this  Article  shall apply provided that the necessary appointments to the MDCG and expert panels have been made.
- 8. By  way  of  derogation  from  Article  10a  and  point  (a)  of  Article  10b(1)  of  Directive  90/385/EEC  and  Article  14(1) and  (2)  and  points  (a)  and  (b)  of  Article  14a(1)  of  Directive  93/42/EEC,  manufacturers,  authorised  representatives, importers  and  notified  bodies  which,  during  the  period  starting  on  the  later  of  the  dates  referred  to  point  (d)  of Article  123(3)  and  ending  18  months  later,  comply  with  Article  29(4)  and  Article  56(5)  of  this  Regulation  shall  be considered  to  comply  with  the  laws  and  regulations  adopted  by  Member  States  in  accordance  with,  respectively, Article  10a  of  Directive  90/385/EEC  or  Article  14(1)  and  (2)  of  Directive  93/42/EEC  and  with,  respectively,  point  (a)  of Article  10b(1)  of  Directive  90/385/EEC  or  points  (a)  and  (b)  of  Article  14a(1)  of  Directive  93/42/EEC  as  specified  in Decision 2010/227/EU.
- 9. Authorisations  granted  by  the  competent  authorities  of  the  Member  States  in  accordance  with  Article  9(9)  of Directive 90/385/EEC or Article 11(13) of Directive 93/42/EEC shall keep the validity indicated in the authorisation.
- 10. Devices  falling  within  the  scope  of  this  Regulation  in  accordance  with  points  (f)  and  (g)  of  Article  1(6)  which have  been  legally  placed  on  the  market  or  put  into  service  in  accordance  with  the  rules  in  force  in  the  Member  States prior  to 26 May 2020 may continue to be placed on the market and put into service in the Member States concerned.
- 11. Clinical investigations which have started to be conducted in accordance with Article 10 of Directive 90/385/EEC or  Article  15  of  Directive  93/42/EEC  prior  to  26  May  2020  may  continue  to  be  conducted.  