The audit team of the notified body shall include at least one member  with past experience of assessments of the technology  concerned  in  accordance  with  Sections  .  to  .  of  Annex  VII.  In  circumstances  where  such experience  is  not  immediately obvious  or  applicable,  the  notified  body  shall  provide  a  documented  rationale  for the  composition  of  that  team.  The  assessment  procedure  shall  include  an  audit  on  the  manufacturer's  premises and, if appropriate, on the premises of  the manufacturer's suppliers and/or subcontractors to verify the manufac­ turing and other relevant processes.
Moreover,  in  the  case  of  class  IIa  and  class  IIb  devices,  the  quality  management  system  assessment  shall  be accompanied  by  the  assessment  of  technical  documentation  for  devices  selected  on  a  representative  basis  in accordance  with  Sections    to  .  In  choosing  representative  samples,  the  notified  body  shall  take  into account the published guidance developed by the MDCG pursuant to Article 105 and in particular  the novelty of the  technology,  similarities  in  design,  technology,  manufacturing  and  sterilisation  methods,  the  intended  purpose and  the  results  of  any  previous  relevant  assessments  such  as  with  regard  to  physical,  chemical,  biological  or clinical  properties,  that  have  been  carried  out  in  accordance  with  this  Regulation.  The  notified  body  in  question shall document its rationale for  the samples taken.
If  the  quality  management  system conforms  to the  relevant  provisions  of  this  Regulation,  the  notified  body  shall issue  an  EU  quality  management  system  certificate.  The  notified  body  shall  notify  the  manufacturer  of  its decision to issue the certificate. The decision shall contain the conclusions of the audit and a reasoned report.
- . The manufacturer  in  question  shall  inform  the  notified  body  which  approved  the  quality  management  system  of any  plan  for  substantial  changes  to  the  quality  management  system,  or  the  device-range  covered.  The  notified body  shall  assess  the  changes  proposed,  determine  the  need  for  additional  audits  and  verify  whether  after  those changes the quality management system still meets the requirements referred to in Section . It shall notify the manufacturer  of  its  decision  which  shall  contain  the  conclusions  of  the  assessment,  and  where  applicable, conclusions  of  additional  audits.  The  approval  of  any  substantial  change  to  the  quality  management  system  or the device-range covered shall take the form of a supplement to the EU quality management system certificate.
- 3. Surveillance assessment applicable to class IIa, class IIb and class III devices
- . The  aim  of  surveillance  is  to  ensure  that  the  manufacturer  duly  fulfils  the  obligations  arising  from  the  approved quality management system.
- . The manufacturer shall give authorisation to the notified body to carry out all the necessary audits, including onsite audits, and supply it with all relevant information, in particular:
- -  the documentation on its quality management system,
- -  documentation on any findings and conclusions resulting from the application of the post-market surveillance  plan,  including  the  PMCF  plan,  for  a  representative  sample  of  devices,  and  of  the  provisions  on vigilance set out in Articles 87 to 92,
- -  the  data  stipulated  in  the  part  of  the  quality  management  system  relating  to  design,  such  as  the  results  of analyses,  calculations,  tests  and  the  solutions  adopted  regarding  the  risk-management  as  referred  to  in Section 4 of Annex I, and
- -  the  data  stipulated  in  the  part  of  the  quality  management  system  relating  to  manufacture,  such  as  quality control reports and test data, calibration data, and records on the qualifications of the personnel concerned.
- . Notified bodies shall periodically, at least once every 12 months, carry out appropriate audits and assessments to make  sure  that  the  manufacturer  in  question  applies  the  approved  quality  management  system  and  the  postmarket surveillance  plan.  Those  audits  and  assessments  shall  include  audits  on  the  premises  of  the  manufacturer and,  if  appropriate,  of  the  manufacturer's  suppliers  and/or  subcontractors.  At  the  time  of  such  on-site  audits,  the notified  body  shall,  where  necessary,  carry  out  or  ask  for  tests  in  order  to  check  that  the  quality  management system  is  working  properly.  It  shall  provide  the  manufacturer  with  a  surveillance  audit  report  and,  if  a  test  has been carried out, with a test report.
- . The  notified  body  shall  randomly  perform  at  least  once  every  five  years  unannounced  audits  on  the  site  of  the manufacturer  and,  where  appropriate,  of  the  manufacturer's  suppliers  and/or  subcontractors,  which  may  be combined  with  the  periodic  surveillance  assessment  referred  to  in  Section  .  or  be  performed  in  addition  to that  surveillance  assessment.  The  notified  body  shall  establish  a  plan  for  such  unannounced  on-site  audits  but shall not disclose it to the manufacturer.
Within  the  context  of  such  unannounced  on-site  audits,  the  notified  body  shall  test  an  adequate  sample  of  the devices  produced  or  an  adequate  sample  from  the  manufacturing  process  to verify  that  the  manufactured  device is  in  conformity  with  the  technical  documentation,  with  the  exception  of  the  devices  referred  to  in  the  second subparagraph  of  Article  52(8).  Prior  to  unannounced  on-site  audits,  the  notified  body  shall  specify  the  relevant sampling criteria and testing procedure.
Instead  of,  or  in  addition  to,  sampling  referred  to  in  the  second  paragraph,  the  notified  body  shall  take  samples of  devices  from  the  market  to verify  that  the  manufactured  device  is  in  conformity  with  the  technical  documen­ tation,  with  the  exception  of  the  devices  referred  to  in  the  second  subparagraph  of  Article  52(8).  Prior  to  the sampling, the notified body in question shall specify the relevant sampling criteria and testing procedure.
The notified  body  shall  provide  the  manufacturer  in  question  with  an  on-site  audit  report  which  shall  include,  if applicable, the result of  the sample test.
- . In  the  case  of  class  IIa  and  class  IIb  devices,  the  surveillance  assessment  shall  also  include  an  assessment  of  the technical  documentation as referred to in Sections  to  for  the device or devices concerned on the basis of further  representative  samples  chosen  in  accordance  with  the  rationale  documented  by  the  notified  body  in accordance with the second paragraph of Section .
In  the  case  of  class  III  devices,  the  surveillance  assessment  shall  also  include  a  test  of  the  approved  parts  and/or materials  that  are  essential  for the  integrity  of  the  device,  including,  where  appropriate,  a  check  that  the quantities of produced or purchased parts and/or materials correspond to the quantities of finished devices.
- . The  notified  body  shall  ensure  that  the  composition  of  the  assessment  team  is  such  that  there  is  sufficient experience  with  the  evaluation  of  the  devices,  systems  and  processes  concerned,  continuous  objectivity  and neutrality;  this  shall  include  a  rotation  of  the  members  of  the  assessment  team  at  appropriate  intervals.  As a  general rule,  a  lead  auditor  shall  neither  lead  nor  attend  audits  for  more  than  three  consecutive years  in  respect of  the same manufacturer.
- . If  the  notified  body  finds  a  divergence  between  the  sample  taken  from  the  devices  produced  or  from  the  market and  the  specifications  laid  down  in  the  technical  documentation  or  the  approved  design,  it  shall  suspend  or withdraw the relevant certificate or impose restrictions on it.
## CHAPTER II
## ASSESSMENT OF THE TECHNICAL DOCUMENTATION
- 4. Assessment  of  the  technical  documentation  applicable  to  class  III  devices  and  to  the  class  IIb  devices  referred  to in the second subparagraph of Article 52(4)
- . In  addition  to  the  obligations  laid  down  in  Section  2,  the  manufacturer  shall  lodge  with  the  notified  body  an application  for  assessment  of  the  technical  documentation  relating  to  the  device  which  it  plans  to  place  on  the market or put into service and which is covered by the quality management system referred to in Section 2.
