The CSIRTs may participate in international cooperation networks.
- 2. Member States shall ensure that their CSIRTs jointly have the technical capabilities necessary to carry out the tasks referred  to  in  paragraph  3.  Member  States  shall  ensure  that  sufficient  resources  are  allocated  to  their  CSIRTs  to  ensure adequate staffing levels for the purpose of enabling the CSIRTs to develop their technical capabilities.
- 3. The CSIRTs shall have the following tasks:
- (a) monitoring  and  analysing  cyber  threats,  vulnerabilities  and  incidents  at  national  level  and,  upon  request,  providing assistance  to  essential  and  important  entities  concerned  regarding  real-time  or  near  real-time  monitoring  of  their network and information systems;
- (b) providing early warnings, alerts, announcements and dissemination of information to essential and important entities concerned as well as to the competent authorities and other relevant stakeholders on cyber threats, vulnerabilities and incidents, if possible in near real-time;
- (c) responding to incidents and providing assistance to the essential and important entities concerned, where applicable;
- (d) collecting  and  analysing  forensic  data  and  providing  dynamic  risk  and  incident  analysis  and  situational  awareness regarding cybersecurity; - (e) providing, upon the request of an essential or important entity, a proactive scanning of the network and information systems of the entity concerned to detect vulnerabilities with a potential significant impact;
- (f) participating  in  the  CSIRTs  network  and  providing  mutual  assistance  in  accordance  with  their  capacities  and competencies to other members of the CSIRTs network upon their request;
- (g) where  applicable,  acting  as  a  coordinator  for  the  purposes  of  the  coordinated  vulnerability  disclosure  under  Article 12(1);
- (h) contributing to the deployment of secure information-sharing tools pursuant to Article 10(3).
The  CSIRTs  may  carry  out  proactive  non-intrusive  scanning  of  publicly  accessible  network  and  information  systems  of essential and important entities. Such scanning shall be carried out to detect vulnerable or insecurely configured network and  information  systems  and  inform  the  entities  concerned.  Such  scanning  shall  not  have  any  negative  impact  on  the functioning of the entities' services.
When carrying out the tasks referred to in the first subparagraph, the CSIRTs may prioritise particular tasks on the basis of a risk-based approach.
- 4. The CSIRTs shall establish cooperation relationships with relevant stakeholders in the private sector, with a view to achieving the objectives of this Directive.
- 5. In  order  to  facilitate  cooperation  referred  to  in  paragraph  4,  the  CSIRTs  shall  promote  the  adoption  and  use  of common or standardised practices, classification schemes and taxonomies in relation to:
- (a) incident-handling procedures;
- (b) crisis management; and
- (c) coordinated vulnerability disclosure under Article 12(1).
## Article 12
## Coordinated vulnerability disclosure and a European vulnerability database
- 1. Each Member State shall designate one of its CSIRTs as a coordinator for  the purposes of coordinated vulnerability disclosure.  The  CSIRT  designated  as  coordinator  shall  act  as  a  trusted  intermediary,  facilitating,  where  necessary,  the interaction  between  the  natural  or  legal  person  reporting  a  vulnerability  and  the  manufacturer  or  provider  of  the potentially vulnerable ICT products or ICT services, upon the request of either party. The tasks of the CSIRT designated as coordinator shall include:
- (a) identifying and contacting the entities concerned;
- (b) assisting the natural or legal persons reporting a vulnerability; and
- (c) negotiating disclosure timelines and managing vulnerabilities that affect multiple entities.
Member  States  shall  ensure  that  natural  or  legal  persons  are  able  to  report,  anonymously  where  they  so  request,  a vulnerability  to  the  CSIRT  designated  as  coordinator.  The  CSIRT  designated  as  coordinator  shall  ensure  that  diligent follow-up action is carried out with regard to the reported vulnerability and shall ensure the anonymity of the natural or legal person reporting the vulnerability. Where a reported vulnerability could have a significant impact on entities in more than one Member State, the CSIRT designated as coordinator of each Member State concerned shall, where appropriate, cooperate with other CSIRTs designated as coordinators within the CSIRTs network. - 2. ENISA shall  develop  and  maintain,  after  consulting  the  Cooperation  Group,  a  European  vulnerability  database.  To that end, ENISA shall establish and maintain the appropriate information systems, policies and procedures, and shall adopt the  necessary  technical  and  organisational  measures  to  ensure  the  security  and  integrity  of  the  European  vulnerability database, with a view in particular  to enabling entities, regardless of whether  they fall within the scope of  this Directive, and  their  suppliers  of  network  and  information  systems,  to  disclose  and  register,  on  a  voluntary  basis,  publicly  known vulnerabilities  in  ICT  products  or  ICT  services.  All  stakeholders  shall  be  provided  access  to  the  information  about  the vulnerabilities contained in the European vulnerability database. That database shall include:
- (a) information describing the vulnerability;
- (b) the affected ICT products or ICT services and the severity of the vulnerability in terms of the circumstances under which it may be exploited;
- (c) the  availability  of  related  patches  and,  in  the  absence  of  available  patches,  guidance  provided  by  the  competent authorities or the CSIRTs addressed to users of vulnerable ICT products and ICT services as to how the risks resulting from disclosed vulnerabilities can be mitigated.
## Article 13
## Cooperation at national level
- 1. Where they are separate, the competent authorities, the single point of contact and the CSIRTs of the same Member State shall cooperate with each other with regard to the fulfilment of the obligations laid down in this Directive.
- 2. Member States shall ensure that their CSIRTs or, where applicable, their competent authorities, receive notifications of significant incidents pursuant to Article 23, and incidents, cyber threats and near misses pursuant to Article 30.
- 3. 