( 4 ) Directive (EU) 2016/1148 of  the European Parliament and of  the Council of 6 July 2016 concerning measures for a high common level of security of network and information systems across the Union (OJ L 194, , p. 1). 
undermine  user  confidence and  cause major  damage  to  the  Union's  economy  and  society.  Cybersecurity preparedness and effectiveness are therefore now more essential than ever to the proper functioning of the internal market.  Moreover,  cybersecurity  is  a  key  enabler  for  many  critical  sectors  to  successfully  embrace  the  digital transformation and to fully grasp the economic, social and sustainable benefits of digitalisation.
- (4) The legal basis of Directive (EU) 2016/1148 was Article 114 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), the objective of which is the establishment and functioning of the internal market by enhancing measures for the  approximation  of  national  rules.  The  cybersecurity  requirements  imposed  on  entities  providing  services  or carrying out activities which are economically significant vary considerably among Member States in terms of type of  requirement,  their  level  of  detail  and  the  method  of  supervision.  Those  disparities  entail  additional  costs  and create  difficulties  for  entities  that  offer  goods  or  services  across  borders.  Requirements  imposed  by  one  Member State that  are  different  from,  or  even  in  conflict  with,  those  imposed  by  another  Member  State,  may  substantially affect  such  cross-border  activities.  Furthermore,  the  possibility  of  the  inadequate  design  or  implementation  of cybersecurity requirements in one Member State is likely to have repercussions at the level of cybersecurity of other Member States, in particular given the intensity of cross-border exchanges. The review of Directive (EU) 2016/1148 has  shown  a  wide  divergence  in  its  implementation  by  Member  States,  including  in  relation  to  its  scope,  the delimitation of which was very largely left to the discretion of  the Member States. Directive (EU) 2016/1148 also provided the Member States with very wide discretion as regards the implementation of  the security and incident reporting  obligations  laid  down  therein.  Those  obligations  were  therefore  implemented  in  significantly  different ways  at  national  level.  There  are  similar  divergences  in  the  implementation  of  the  provisions  of  Directive  (EU) 2016/1148 on supervision and enforcement.
- (5) All  those  divergences  entail  a  fragmentation  of  the  internal  market  and  can  have  a  prejudicial  effect  on  its functioning, affecting in particular the cross-border provision of services and the level of cyber resilience due to the application  of  a  variety  of  measures.  Ultimately,  those  divergences  could  lead  to  the  higher  vulnerability  of  some Member States  to  cyber  threats,  with  potential  spill-over  effects  across  the  Union.  This  Directive  aims  to  remove such wide divergences among Member States, in particular by setting out minimum rules regarding the functioning of  a  coordinated  regulatory  framework,  by  laying  down  mechanisms  for  effective  cooperation  among  the responsible authorities in each Member State, by updating the list of sectors and activities subject to cybersecurity obligations  and  by  providing  effective  remedies  and  enforcement  measures  which  are  key  to  the  effective enforcement  of  those  obligations.  Therefore,  Directive  (EU)  2016/1148  should  be  repealed  and  replaced  by  this Directive.
- (6) With the repeal of Directive (EU) 2016/1148, the scope of application by sectors should be extended to a larger part of the economy to provide a comprehensive coverage of sectors and services of vital importance to key societal and economic activities in the  internal  market.  In  particular,  this  Directive  aims  to overcome  the  shortcomings  of  the differentiation  between  operators  of  essential  services  and  digital  service  providers,  which  has  been  proven  to  be obsolete, since it does not reflect the importance of the sectors or services for the societal and economic activities in the internal market.
- (7) Under Directive (EU) 2016/1148, Member States were responsible for identifying the entities which met the criteria to qualify as operators of essential services. In order to eliminate the wide divergences among Member States in that regard and ensure legal certainty as regards the cybersecurity risk-management measures and reporting obligations for  all  relevant  entities,  a  uniform  criterion  should  be  established  that  determines  the  entities  falling  within  the scope of this Directive. That criterion should consist of the application of a size-cap rule, whereby all entities which qualify as medium-sized enterprises under Article 2 of the Annex to Commission Recommendation 2003/361/EC ( 5 ),  or  exceed  the  ceilings  for  medium-sized  enterprises  provided  for  in  paragraph  1  of  that  Article, and  which  operate  within  the  sectors  and  provide  the  types  of  service  or  carry  out  the  activities  covered  by  this
( 5 ) Commission Recommendation 2003/361/EC of 6 May 2003 concerning the definition of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (OJ L 124, , p. 36). Directive fall within its scope. Member States should also provide for certain small enterprises and microenterprises, as defined in Article 2(2) and (3) of that Annex, which fulfil specific criteria that indicate a key role for society, the economy or for particular sectors or types of service to fall within the scope of this Directive.
- (8) The  exclusion  of  public  administration  entities  from  the  scope  of  this  Directive  should  apply  to  entities  whose activities are  predominantly  carried  out  in the areas of national security, public security, defence or  law enforcement,  including  the  prevention,  investigation,  detection  and  prosecution  of  criminal  offences.  However, public  administration  entities  whose  activities  are  only  marginally  related  to  those  areas  should  not  be  excluded from the scope of  this  Directive.  