## . Prior and reasoned request in accordance with national procedural rules
## a) Request by whom?
(385) Whilst not specified, it may be assumed that the request will normally be initiated by the deployer, i.e. by the competent (law enforcement) authority . According to the definition of law enforcement authority under Article 3(45) b) AI Act, any 'other body or entity entrusted by Member State law to exercise public authority and public powers for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security' is considered a law enforcement authority and could also be the responsible as the 'competent authority' for submitting the request for prior authorisation.
(386) The use of a real-time RBI system for activities falling outside the scope of the AI Act does not need to be authorised under Article 5(3) AI Act. If subsequently such a system is being used for law enforcement purposes, the use would fall within the scope of the AI Act and an authorisation would be required where the requirements of Article 5(1)(h) AI Act are met.
## b) Request for which use?
(387) Prior  authorisation  is  needed  for  the  use  of  'real-time'  RBI  systems  in  publicly accessible spaces for law enforcement purposes, even if the systems are operated by other  parties  on  behalf  of  law  enforcement  authorities,  for  example  sport  clubs  or shopping malls .
## For example:
- - An organisation entrusted with resources for searching for missing children decides to  use  a  real-time  RBI  system.  It  has  no  mandate  to  exercise  public  authority  and public powers or for preventing criminal offences or tasks for the prevention of threats to public security. Such use does not fall under the prohibition laid down in Article 5(1)(h)  AI  Act,  since  it  is  not  for  law  enforcement  purposes.  That  system  will, however, be categorised as ' high-risk' (point 1 (a) of Annex III) and a requirement of prior  consultation  of  the  supervisory  data  protection  authority  may  be  necessary pursuant to Article 36 GDPR. Depending on the applicable national law and whether one of the exceptions to Article 9(1) GDPR applies, a prior authorisation may also be required for such processing. By contrast, if the same organisation were requested by law enforcement authorities to act on their behalf for the search of missing children in a law enforcement context and under the supervision and instructions of the competent law enforcement authorities, prior authorisation would be needed pursuant to Article 5(3) AI Act.
- -  A  private  organisation entrusted  with providing resources to aid persons who risk becoming victims of a natural disaster 220 decides to use a real-time RBI system for that purpose. Such use does not fall under the prohibition laid down in Article 5(1)(h) AI Act, since it is not for law enforcement purposes. That system will, however, be categorised  as ' high-risk'  (point  1  (a)  of  Annex  III)  and  a  requirement  of  prior consultation of the supervisory data protection authority may be necessary pursuant to Article 36 GDPR. Depending on the applicable national law and whether one of the exceptions to Article 9(1) GDPR applies, a prior authorisation may also be required for such processing.
## c) When?  ' Each use'
(388) In accordance with Article 5(3) AI Act, prior authorisation is needed for 'each use'. This  implies  that  the  decisive  moment  for  obtaining  such  authorisation  is  not  the moment prior to installing real-time RBI systems, but each concrete use thereof.
## For example:
- - the police install biometric ready CCTV cameras at the main train station of a city (no authorisation under the AI Act is needed, but the biometric system must comply with the requirements on high-risk systems, a FRIA must be prepared prior to the first use and an individual authorisation by a judicial or independent administrative authority is needed before each individual use of the system).
The police has concrete indications that a terrorist will arrive by train in the town (prior authorisation is needed for real-time identification).
## d) Motivated Request
- (389) Article 5(3) AI Act requires each individual request for the use of real-time RBI to be 'reasoned' and hence substantiated and motivated.
- (390) Certain Member States allow such requests to be submitted online. 221 In  accordance with Article 5(5) AI Act, national legislation should lay down requirements regarding the  exact  content  of  the  request,  while  fully  taking  into  account  the  requirements outlined  above,  including  sufficient  evidence  to  determine  the  strict  necessity  and proportionality for the use of real-time RBI and other relevant aspects to reflect the exceptional nature of authorising such use.
## . Authorisation  by  a  judicial  authority  or  an  independent  administrative authority
- (391) The authorisation may only be granted by a judicial or an independent administrative authority whose decision is binding.
220 Natural disasters include a river flood or fire of nature.
221 See for example, the requests for authorisation to the French Data Protection Authority, the CNIL.
## a) Independent authority
(392) The CJEU has interpreted the concept of 'independence' in different contexts. In HK v Prokuratuur, for  example,  the CJEU  explained  that  independence  means  that  the authority maintains a 'neutral stance' 222 . The CJEU specified that an authority involved in  previous  investigations,  in  that  case  the  public  prosecutor,  does  not  have  such independence. Similar considerations may apply as regards the independence required by Article 5(3) AI Act, implying that the authorising authority needs to be independent from the authority using the RBI system. This would apply not only for the police, but also cases of investigative judges or prosecutors that supervise the work of police and the use of RBI for which authorisation is sought.
(393) In Commission  v  Poland ,  a  case  dealing  with  the  question  when  a  body  can  be considered to be independent in the context of railway safety, the CJEU found that, 'as regards public bodies, independence usually refers to a status that ensures that the body in question is able to act completely freely in relation to those bodies in respect of which its independence is to be ensured, shielded from any instructions or pressure'. 223 Similar indications may apply in the context of Article 5(3) AI Act.
(394) The  judicial  authorities  in  a  democratic  society  are  in  general  also  independent authorities.  The  judiciary  plays  an  important  role  when  it  is  independent  from  the executive government(s) and from the legislator, covering and reviewing the application of the legislation and fundamental rights and freedoms in an autonomous and independent way. Judicial independence is one of the crucial facets of the rule of law and is guaranteed by Article 47 (Charter) and Article 6(1) ECHR. 