Guidelines 5/2022 and the European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS) as affecting several fundamental rights and freedoms. That view is shared by The EU Agency for Fundamental  Rights  and  by  the  Council  of  Europe. 226 Both  the  CJEU 227 and  the ECtHR 228  have confirmed the sensitive nature of processing biometric data.
(398) Any  interference in  fundamental  rights  and  freedoms  must  always  respect  the essence of the rights and freedoms . This follows from Article 52(1) Charter.
(399) The notion of 'essence' of fundamental rights and freedoms has been developed in the CJEU's case-law and is an independent value in the Union's legal order. If the essence of a fundamental right or freedom is not respected, it means that a right or freedom is unduly touched by a measure so that no interference shall be allowed upfront.
Only 'if necessary and proportionate'
(400) Any interference with fundamental rights and freedoms requires 'a law' that should in principle respect the necessity and proportionality pursuant to Article 52 Charter. (See below under Article 5(5) AI Act.) Article 5(3) AI Act requires that the national law permitting the use of real-time RBI in publicly accessible spaces for law enforcement purposes must provide that authorisation for such use is permitted 'only where it [the authority] is satisfied that the use is necessary for, and proportionate to, achieving one of the objectives specified' in Article 5(1)(h) AI Act. National authorities need to verify whether the biometric identification is strictly necessary. 229 This assessment should be based on the FRIA that should have already include an assessment of the necessity and the proportionality in a general manner prior to requesting the authorisation for each use with the specific circumstances.
## . The exception to the requirement of prior  authorisation: request within 24 hours and consequences if rejected
(401) In cases of urgency, a user may submit a request for authorisation within 24 hours as from the moment that the real-time RBI system is used. In practice, that will generally be  the  moment  that  the  biometric  ready  or  capably  cameras  are  'switched  on'  and deployed and the first biometric comparison is made with the system. The logging of the processing activities should be made available to the authority to substantiate the timeliness of the request. 230
(402) In such a case, the request should motivate why no prior request was submitted prior to starting using the system.
226 Consultative Committee of the Convention for the protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data (ETS 108), Guidelines on Facial Recognition, 2021.
227 Judgment of the Court of Justice of 26 January 2023, Ministerstvo na vatreshnite raboti , C-205/21, ECLI:EU:C:2023:49, paragraphs 60 to76 and 116 to 134.
