- - Using emotion recognition AI systems during the recruitment process is prohibited.
- - Using emotion recognition AI systems during the probationary period is prohibited.
161 See also the recitals in relation to the high-risk AI systems in the workplace, such as Recital 56, deploying a broad interpretation. See also the list of high-risk AI systems in Annex III, referring to self-employment at 4. Self-employment is also broadly covered by EU antidiscrimination law.
162 Example from Boyd et al., 2023, Automated Emotion Recognition in the Workplace: How Proposed Technologies Reveal Potential
- - Using cameras by a supermarket to track its employees' emotions, such as happiness, is prohibited.
- - Using cameras by a supermarket or a bank to detect suspicious customers, for example to  conclude  that  somebody  is  about  to  commit  a  robbery,  is  not  prohibited  under Article 5(1)(f) AI Act, when it is ensured that no employees are being tracked and there are sufficient safeguards.
## b) 'Education institutions'
(255) The reference to education institutions is broad and should be understood to include both public and private institutions. There is no limitation as regards the types or ages of  pupils  or  students  or  of  a  specific  environment  (online,  in  person,  in  a  blended mode 163 etc). For example, education and training institutions at all levels fall under the scope of the prohibition in Article 5(1)(f) AI Act, including vocational schools, i.e. schools where students learn skills involving the use of their hands 164 and continuous training 165 . Education institutions are normally accredited or sanctioned by the relevant national education authorities or equivalent authorities. A key feature is that education institutions may provide a certificate (respectively participation is a precondition for obtaining  a  certificate).  The  prohibition  should  be  understood  to  also  apply  to candidates during the admissibility process.
## For example:
- - An AI-based application using emotion recognition for learning a language online outside an education institution is not prohibited under Article 5(1)(f) AI Act. By contrast, if students are required to use the application  by an education institution, the use of such emotion recognition system is prohibited.
- -  An  education  institution  using  AI-based  eye  tracking  software  when  examining students online to track the fixation point and movement of the eyes (gaze point, e.g., to detect if unauthorized material is used) is not prohibited, because the system does not  identify  or  infer  emotions.  By  contrast,  if  the  system  is  also  used  to  detect emotions, such as emotional arousal and anxiousness, this would fall within the scope of the prohibition.
- -  Using  an  emotion  recognition  AI  system  by  an  education  institution  to  infer  the interest  and  attention  of  students  is  prohibited.  By  contrast,  if  only  deployed  for learning purposes in the context of a role-play (for example, for training actors or
163 Blended learning is to be understood as taking more than one approach in the education and training process, including blending digital (including online learning) and non-digital learning tools.
164 See e.g., the impact assessment accompanying the proposal of the Commission, where specific AI uses by vocational training institutions were mentioned as posing intense interference with a broad range of fundamental rights, e.g., when assessing: EU Commission, Commission Staff Working Document. Impact Assessment. 