On an exceptional basis and in light of public accountability, operators of AI systems which are components of the large-scale IT systems established by the legal acts listed in an annex to this Regulation and operators of high-risk AI systems that are intended to be used by public authorities should, respectively, take the necessary  steps  to  comply  with  the  requirements  of  this  Regulation  by  end  of  2030  and  by  2  August  2030.
- (178) Providers  of  high-risk  AI  systems  are  encouraged  to  start  to  comply,  on  a  voluntary  basis,  with  the  relevant obligations  of  this  Regulation  already  during  the  transitional  period.
- (179) This Regulation should apply from 2 August 2026. However, taking into account the unacceptable risk associated with the use of AI in certain ways, the prohibitions as well as the general provisions of this Regulation should already apply  from  2  February  2025.  While  the  full  effect  of  those  prohibitions  follows  with  the  establishment  of  the governance and enforcement of this Regulation, anticipating the application of the prohibitions is important to take account  of  unacceptable  risks  and  to  have  an  effect  on  other  procedures,  such  as  in  civil  law.  Moreover,  the infrastructure  related  to  the  governance  and  the  conformity  assessment  system  should  be  operational  before 2 August 2026, therefore the provisions on notified bodies and governance structure should apply from 2 August 2025. Given the rapid pace of technological advancements and adoption of general-purpose AI models, obligations for providers of general-purpose AI models should apply from 2 August 2025. Codes of practice should be ready by 2  May  2025  in  view  of  enabling  providers  to  demonstrate  compliance  on  time.  The  AI  Office  should  ensure  that classification rules and procedures are up to date in light of technological developments. In addition, Member States should lay down and notify to the Commission the rules on penalties, including administrative fines, and ensure that they are properly and effectively implemented by the date of application of this Regulation. Therefore the provisions on penalties  should  apply  from  2  August  2025.
- (180) The  European  Data  Protection  Supervisor  and  the  European  Data  Protection  Board  were  consulted  in  accordance with Article  42(1)  and  (2)  of  Regulation  (EU)  2018/1725  and  delivered  their  joint  opinion  on  18  June  2021,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
## CHAPTER I
## GENERAL PROVISIONS
## Article  1
## Subject matter`
- 1. The  purpose  of  this  Regulation  is  to  improve  the  functioning  of  the  internal  market  and  promote  the  uptake  of human-centric  and  trustworthy  artificial  intelligence  (AI),  while  ensuring  a  high  level  of  protection  of  health,  safety, fundamental rights enshrined in the Charter, including democracy, the rule of  law and environmental protection, against the  harmful  effects  of  AI  systems  in  the  Union  and  supporting  innovation.
- 2. This  Regulation  lays  down:
- (a) harmonised rules for  the  placing  on  the  market,  the  putting  into  service,  and  the  use  of  AI  systems  in  the  Union;
- (b) prohibitions  of  certain  AI  practices;
- (c) specific  requirements  for  high-risk  AI  systems  and  obligations  for  operators  of  such  systems;
- (d) harmonised transparency rules for certain  AI  systems;
- (e) harmonised rules for  the  placing  on  the  market  of  general-purpose  AI  models;
- (f) rules  on  market  monitoring,  market  surveillance,  governance  and  enforcement;
- (g) measures to support innovation, with a particular  focus  on  SMEs,  including  start-ups.
## Article  2
## Scope
- 1. This  Regulation  applies  to:
- (a) providers placing on the market or putting into service AI systems or placing on the market general-purpose AI models in the Union, irrespective of whether those providers are established or located within the Union or in a third country;
- (b) deployers of  AI  systems  that  have  their  place  of  establishment  or  are  located  within  the  Union;
- (c) providers and deployers of AI systems that have their place of establishment or are located in a third country, where the output  produced by the  AI  system is  used  in  the  Union;
- (d) importers  and  distributors  of  AI  systems;
- (e) product  manufacturers  placing  on  the  market  or  putting  into  service  an  AI  system  together  with  their  product  and under  their  own  name  or  trademark;
- (f) authorised  representatives  of  providers,  which are  not  established  in  the  Union;
- (g) affected  persons  that  are  located  in  the  Union.
- 2. For AI systems classified as high-risk AI systems in accordance with Article 6(1) related to products covered by the Union harmonisation legislation listed in Section B of Annex I, only Article 6(1), Articles 102 to 109 and Article 112 apply. Article 57 applies only in so far as the requirements for high-risk AI systems under this Regulation have been integrated in that  Union  harmonisation  legislation.
- 3. This  Regulation  does  not  apply  to  areas  outside  the  scope  of  Union  law,  and  shall  not,  in  any  event,  affect  the competences of the Member States concerning national security, regardless of the type of entity entrusted by the Member States  with  carrying  out  tasks  in  relation  to  those  competences.
This Regulation does not apply to AI systems where and in so far they are placed on the market, put into service, or used with or without modification exclusively for military, defence or national security purposes, regardless of the type of entity carrying  out  those  activities.
This Regulation does not apply to AI systems which are not placed on the market or put into service in the Union, where the  output  is  used  in  the  Union  exclusively  for  military,  defence  or  national  security  purposes,  regardless  of  the  type  of entity  carrying  out  those  activities.
- 4. This  Regulation  applies  neither  to  public  authorities  in  a  third  country  nor  to  international  organisations  falling within the scope of this Regulation pursuant to paragraph 1, where those authorities or organisations use AI systems in the framework of  international  cooperation  or  agreements  for  law  enforcement  and  judicial  cooperation  with  the  Union  or with  one  or  more  Member  States,  provided  that  such  a  third  country  or  international  organisation  provides  adequate safeguards  with  respect  to  the  protection  of  fundamental  rights  and  freedoms  of  individuals.
- 5. This Regulation shall not affect the application of the provisions on the liability of providers of intermediary services as  set  out  in  Chapter  II  of  Regulation  (EU)  2022/2065.
- 6. This Regulation does not apply to AI systems or AI models, including their output, specifically developed and put into service  for  the  sole  purpose  of  scientific  research  and  development.
- 7. Union law on the protection of personal data, privacy and the confidentiality of communications applies to personal data processed in connection with the rights and obligations laid down in this Regulation. This Regulation shall not affect Regulation  (EU)  2016/679 or (EU) 2018/1725, or Directive 2002/58/EC or (EU) 2016/680, without prejudice to Article 10(5)  and  Article  59  of  this  Regulation.
- 8. This  Regulation  does  not  apply  to  any  research,  testing  or  development  activity  regarding  AI  systems  or  AI  models prior  to  their  being  placed  on  the  market  or  put  into  service.  Such  activities  shall  be  conducted  in  accordance  with applicable  Union  law.  Testing  in  real  world  conditions  shall  not  be  covered  by  that  exclusion.
- 9. This Regulation is without prejudice to the rules laid down by other Union legal acts related to consumer protection and product safety.
- 10. 