AI systems are designed to operate with varying  levels  of  autonomy,  meaning  that  they  have  some  degree  of  independence  of  actions  from  human involvement and of capabilities to operate without human intervention. The adaptiveness that an AI system could exhibit after deployment, refers to self-learning capabilities, allowing the system to change while in use. AI systems can be used on a stand-alone basis or as a component of a product, irrespective of whether the system is physically integrated into the product (embedded) or serves the functionality of  the product without being integrated therein (non-embedded).
- (13) The notion of 'deployer' referred to in this Regulation should be interpreted as any natural or legal person, including a public authority, agency or other body, using an AI system under its authority, except where the AI system is used in the course of a personal non-professional activity. Depending on the type of AI system, the use of the system may affect  persons  other  than  the  deployer.
- (14) The notion of 'biometric data' used in this Regulation should be interpreted in light of the notion of biometric data as defined in Article 4, point (14) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679, Article 3, point (18) of Regulation (EU) 2018/1725 and Article 3, point (13) of Directive (EU) 2016/680. Biometric data can allow for the authentication, identification or  categorisation  of  natural  persons  and  for  the  recognition  of  emotions  of  natural  persons.
- (15) The notion of 'biometric identification' referred to in this Regulation should be defined as the automated recognition of  physical,  physiological  and  behavioural  human  features  such  as  the  face,  eye  movement,  body  shape,  voice, prosody, gait, posture, heart rate, blood pressure, odour, keystrokes characteristics, for the purpose of establishing an individual's  identity  by  comparing  biometric  data  of  that  individual  to  stored  biometric  data  of  individuals  in a  reference  database,  irrespective  of  whether  the  individual  has  given  its  consent  or  not.  This  excludes  AI  systems intended to be used for biometric verification, which includes authentication, whose sole purpose is to confirm that a specific natural person is the person he or she claims to be and to confirm the identity of a natural person for the sole  purpose  of  having  access  to  a  service,  unlocking  a  device  or  having  security  access  to  premises.
( 15 ) Regulation  (EU)  2022/2065  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  19  October  2022  on  a  Single  Market  For  Digital Services  and  amending  Directive  2000/31/EC  (Digital  Services  Act)  (OJ  L  277,  ,  p.  1).
- (16) The notion of 'biometric categorisation' referred to in this Regulation should be defined as assigning natural persons to specific categories on the basis of their biometric data. Such specific categories can relate to aspects such as sex, age,  hair  colour,  eye colour, tattoos, behavioural or  personality traits, language, religion, membership of a national minority,  sexual  or  political  orientation.  This  does  not  include  biometric  categorisation  systems  that  are  a  purely ancillary  feature  intrinsically  linked  to  another  commercial  service,  meaning  that  the  feature  cannot,  for  objective technical  reasons,  be  used  without  the  principal  service,  and  the  integration  of  that  feature  or  functionality  is  not a means to circumvent the applicability of the rules of this Regulation. For example, filters categorising facial or body features used on online marketplaces could constitute such an ancillary feature as they can be used only in relation to the  principal  service  which  consists  in  selling  a  product  by  allowing  the  consumer  to  preview  the  display  of  the product on him or herself and help the consumer to make a purchase decision. Filters used on online social network services  which  categorise  facial  or  body  features  to  allow  users  to  add  or  modify  pictures  or  videos  could  also  be considered to be ancillary feature  as such filter  cannot  be  used  without  the  principal  service of  the  social  network services  consisting  in  the  sharing  of  content  online.
- (17) The notion of 'remote biometric identification system' referred to in this Regulation should be defined functionally, as  an  AI  system  intended  for  the  identification  of  natural  persons  without  their  active  involvement,  typically  at a  distance,  through  the  comparison  of  a  person's  biometric  data  with  the  biometric  data  contained  in  a  reference database,  irrespectively  of  the  particular  technology,  processes  or  types  of  biometric  data  used.  Such  remote biometric identification systems are typically used to perceive multiple persons or their behaviour simultaneously in order  to  facilitate significantly  the  identification  of  natural  persons  without their  active involvement.  This excludes AI systems intended to be used for biometric verification, which includes authentication, the sole purpose of which is  to  confirm  that  a  specific  natural  person  is  the  person  he  or  she  claims  to  be  and  to  confirm  the  identity  of a  natural person for  the sole purpose of having access to a service, unlocking a device or having security access to premises. That exclusion is justified by the fact that such systems are likely to have a minor impact on fundamental rights  of  natural  persons  compared  to  the  remote  biometric  identification  systems  which  may  be  used  for  the processing  of  the  biometric  data  of  a  large  number  of  persons  without  their  active  involvement.  In  the  case  of 'real-time' systems, the capturing of the biometric data, the comparison  and the identification occur all instantaneously, near-instantaneously or in any event without a significant delay. In this regard, there should be no scope for circumventing the rules of this Regulation on the 'real-time' use of the AI systems concerned by providing for minor delays. 'Real-time' systems involve the use of 'live' or 'near-live' material, such as video footage, generated by a camera or other device with similar functionality. In the case of 'post' systems, in contrast, the biometric data has already been captured and the comparison and identification occur only after a significant delay. This involves material, such as pictures or  video footage generated by closed circuit television cameras or  private devices, which has  been  generated  before  the  use  of  the  system  in  respect  of  the  natural  persons  concerned.
- (18) The notion of 'emotion recognition system' referred to in this Regulation should be defined as an AI system for the purpose of identifying or  inferring emotions or  intentions of  natural persons on  the basis of  their  biometric data. 