##  Information access restriction
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities          | Security domains   |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|-----------------------------------|--------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #Identity_and_ac- cess_management | #Protection        |
## Control
Access  to  information  and  other  associated  assets  should  be  restricted  in  accordance  with  the established topic-specific policy on access control.
## Purpose
To  ensure  only  authorized  access  and  to  prevent  unauthorized  access  to  information  and  other associated assets.
## Guidance
Access  to  information  and  other  associated  assets  should  be  restricted  in  accordance  with  the established  topic-specific  policies.  The  following  should  be  considered  in  order  to  support  access restriction requirements:
- a) not allowing access to sensitive information by unknown user identities or anonymously. Public or anonymous access should only be granted to storage locations that do not contain any sensitive information;
- b) providing  configuration  mechanisms  to  control  access  to  information  in  systems,  applications and services;
- c) controlling which data can be accessed by a particular user;
- d) controlling which identities or group of identities have which access, such as read, write, delete and execute;
- e) providing physical or logical access controls for the isolation of sensitive applications, application data, or systems.
Further, dynamic access management techniques and processes to protect sensitive information that has high value to the organization should be considered when the organization:
- a) needs granular control over who can access such information during what period and in what way;
- b) wants to share such information with people outside the organization and maintain control over who can access it;
- c) wants to dynamically manage, in real-time, the use and distribution of such information;
- d) wants  to  protect  such  information  against  unauthorized  changes,  copying  and  distribution (including printing);
- e) wants to monitor the use of the information;
- f) wants to record any changes to such information that take place in case a future investigation is required.
Dynamic  access  management  techniques  should  protect  information  throughout  its  life  cycle  (i.e. creation, processing, storage, transmission and disposal), including:
- a) establishing rules on the management of dynamic access based on specific use cases considering:
- 1) granting access permissions based on identity, device, location or application;
- 2) leveraging  the  classification  scheme  in  order  to  determine  what  information  needs  to  be protected with dynamic access management techniques;
- b) establishing operational, monitoring and reporting processes and supporting technical infrastructure.
Dynamic access management systems should protect information by:
- a) requiring authentication, appropriate credentials or a certificate to access information;
## SS- ISO/IEC 27002:2022 (E)
- b) restricting  access,  for  example  to  a  specified  time  frame  (e.g.  after  a  given  date  or  until  a particular date);
- c) using encryption to protect information;
- d) defining the printing permissions for the information;
- e) recording who accesses the information and how the information is used;
- f) raising alerts if attempts to misuse the information are detected.
## Other information
Dynamic access management techniques and other dynamic information protection technologies can support the protection of information even when data is shared beyond the originating organization, where traditional access controls cannot be enforced. It can be applied to documents, emails or other files containing information to limit who can access the content and in what way. It can be at a granular level and be adapted over the life cycle of the information.
Dynamic access management techniques do not replace classical access management [e.g. using access control lists (ACLs)], but can add more factors for conditionality, real-time evaluation, just-in-time data reduction and other enhancements that can be useful for the most sensitive information. It offers a way to control access outside the organization's environment. Incident response can be supported by dynamic access management techniques as permissions can be modified or revoked at any time.
Additional information on a framework for access management is provided in ISO/IEC 29146.
##  Access to source code
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities                                                        | Security domains   |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #Identity_and_access_ management #Application_security #Secure_configura - tion | #Protection        |
## Control
Read  and  write  access to source code, development  tools  and  software  libraries should be appropriately managed.
## Purpose
To prevent the introduction of unauthorized functionality, avoid unintentional or malicious changes and to maintain the confidentiality of valuable intellectual property.
## Guidance
Access  to  source  code  and  associated  items  (such  as  designs,  specifications,  verification  plans  and validation plans) and development tools (e.g. compilers, builders, integration tools, test platforms and environments) should be strictly controlled.
For source code, this can be achieved by controlling central storage of such code, preferably in source code management system.
Read access and write access to source code can differ based on the personnel's role. For example, read access to source code can be broadly provided inside the organization, but write access to source code is only made available to privileged personnel or designated owners. Where code components are used by several developers within an organization, read access to a centralized code repository should be implemented. Furthermore, if open-source code or third-party code components are used inside an
organization, read access to such external code repositories can be broadly provided. However, write access should still be restricted.
The following guidelines should be considered to control access to program source libraries in order to reduce the potential for corruption of computer programs:
- a) managing  the  access  to  program  source  code  and  the  program  source  libraries  according  to established procedures;
- b) granting read and write access to source code based on business needs and managed to address risks of alteration or misuse and according to established procedures;
- c) updating of source code and associated items and granting of access to source code in accordance with change control procedures (see ) and only performing it after appropriate authorization has been received;
- d) not granting developers direct access to the source code repository, but through developer tools that control activities and authorizations on the source code;
- e) holding  program  listings  in  a  secure  environment,  where  read  and  write  access  should  be appropriately managed and assigned;
- f) maintaining an audit log of all accesses and of all changes to source code.
If the program source code is intended to be published, additional controls to provide assurance on its integrity (e.g. digital signature) should be considered.
## Other information
If  access to source code is not properly controlled, source code can be modified or some data in the development environment (e.g. copies of production data, configuration details) can be retrieved by unauthorized persons.
##  Secure authentication
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities          | Security domains   |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|-----------------------------------|--------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #Identity_and_ac- cess_management | #Protection        |
## Control
Secure  authentication  technologies  and  procedures  should  be  implemented  based  on  information access restrictions and the topic-specific policy on access control.
## Purpose
To  ensure  a  user  or  an  entity  is  securely  authenticated,  when  access  to  systems,  applications  and services is granted.
## Guidance
A suitable authentication technique should be chosen to substantiate the claimed identity of a user, software, messages and other entities.
The strength of authentication should be appropriate for the classification of the information to be accessed. Where strong authentication and identity verification is required, authentication methods alternative  to  passwords,  such  as  digital  certificates,  smart  cards,  tokens  or  biometric  means, should be used.
Authentication information should be accompanied by additional authentication factors for accessing critical  information  systems  (also  known  as  multi-factor  authentication).  Using  a  combination  of multiple  authentication  factors,  such  as  what  you  know,  what  you  have  and  what  you  are,  reduces the  possibilities  for  unauthorized  accesses.  Multi-factor  authentication  can  be  combined  with  other techniques to require additional factors under specific circumstances, based on predefined rules and patterns, such as access from an unusual location, from an unusual device or at an unusual time.
Biometric  authentication  information  should  be  invalidated  if  it  is  ever  compromised.  Biometric authentication  can  be  unavailable  depending  on  the  conditions  of  use  (e.g.  moisture  or  aging).  To prepare for these issues, biometric authentication should be accompanied with at least one alternative authentication technique.
The  procedure  for  logging  into  a  system  or  application  should  be  designed  to  minimize  the  risk of  unauthorized  access.  Log-on  procedures  and  technologies  should  be  implemented  considering the following:
- a) not displaying sensitive system or application information until the log-on process has been  successfully  completed  in  order  to  avoid  providing  an  unauthorized  user  with  any unnecessary assistance;
- b) displaying a general notice warning that the system or the application or the service should only be accessed by authorized users;
- c) not  providing  help  messages  during  the  log-on  procedure  that  would  aid  an  unauthorized  user (e.g. 