## Purpose
To  record  events,  generate  evidence,  ensure  the  integrity  of  log  information,  prevent  against unauthorized  access,  identify  information  security  events  that  can  lead  to  an  information  security incident and to support investigations.
## Guidance
## General
The organization should determine the purpose for which logs are created, what data is collected and logged,  and  any  log-specific  requirements  for  protecting  and  handling  the  log  data.  This  should  be documented in a topic-specific policy on logging.
Event logs should include for each event, as applicable:
- a) user IDs;
- b) system activities;
## SS- ISO/IEC 27002:2022 (E)
- c) dates, times and details of relevant events (e.g. log-on and log-off);
- d) device identity, system identifier and location;
- e) network addresses and protocols.
The following events should be considered for logging:
- a) successful and rejected system access attempts;
- b) successful and rejected data and other resource access attempts;
- c) changes to system configuration;
- d) use of privileges;
- e) use of utility programs and applications;
- f) files accessed and the type of access, including deletion of important data files;
- g) alarms raised by the access control system;
- h) activation  and  de-activation  of  security  systems,  such  as  anti-virus  systems  and  intrusion detection systems;
- i) creation, modification or deletion of identities;
- j) transactions  executed  by  users  in  applications.  In  some  cases,  the  applications  are  a  service  or product provided or run by a third party.
It is important for all systems to have synchronized time sources (see ) as this allows for correlation of logs between systems for analysis, alerting and investigation of an incident.
## Protection of logs
Users, including those with privileged access rights, should not have permission to delete or de-activate logs  of  their  own  activities.  They  can  potentially  manipulate  the  logs  on  information  processing facilities under their direct control. Therefore, it is necessary to protect and review the logs to maintain accountability for the privileged users.
Controls  should  aim  to  protect  against  unauthorized  changes  to  log  information  and  operational problems with the logging facility including:
- a) alterations to the message types that are recorded;
- b) log files being edited or deleted;
- c) failure to record events or over-writing of past recorded events if the storage media holding a log file is exceeded.
For protection of logs, the use of the following techniques should be considered: cryptographic hashing, recording in an append-only and read-only file, recording in a public transparency file.
Some  audit  logs  can  be  required  to  be  archived  because  of  requirements  on  data  retention  or requirements to collect and retain evidence (see ).
Where the organization needs to send system or application logs to a vendor to assist with debugging or troubleshooting errors, logs should be de-identified where possible using data masking techniques (see ) for information such as usernames, internet protocol (IP) addresses, hostnames or organization name, before sending to the vendor.
Event  logs  can  contain  sensitive  data  and  personally  identifiable  information.  Appropriate  privacy protection measures should be taken (see ).
## Log analysis
Log analysis should cover the analysis and interpretation of information security events, to help identify unusual activity or anomalous behaviour, which can represent indicators of compromise.
Analysis of events should be performed by taking into account:
- a) the necessary skills for the experts performing the analysis;
- b) determining the procedure of log analysis;
- c) the required attributes of each security-related event;
- d) exceptions  identified  through  the  use  of  predetermined  rules  [e.g.  security  information  and event management (SIEM) or firewall rules, and intrusion detection systems (IDSs) or malware signatures];
- e) known  behaviour  patterns  and  standard  network  traffic  compared  to  anomalous  activity  and behaviour [user and entity behaviour analytics (UEBA)];
- f) results of trend or pattern analysis (e.g. as a result of using data analytics, big data techniques and specialized analysis tools);
- g) available threat intelligence.
Log  analysis  should  be  supported  by  specific  monitoring  activities  to  help  identify  and  analyse anomalous behaviour, which includes:
- a) reviewing successful and unsuccessful attempts to access protected resources [e.g. domain name system (DNS) servers, web portals and file shares];
- b) checking DNS logs to identify outbound network connections to malicious servers, such as those associated with botnet command and control servers;
- c) examining  usage  reports  from  service  providers  (e.g.  invoices  or  service  reports)  for  unusual activity within systems and networks (e.g. by reviewing patterns of activity);
- d) including  event  logs  of  physical  monitoring  such  as  entrance  and  exit  to  ensure  more  accurate detection and incident analysis;
- e) correlating logs to enable efficient and highly accurate analysis.
Suspected and actual information security incidents should be identified (e.g.  malware  infection  or probing of firewalls) and be subject to further investigation (e.g. as part of an information security incident management process, see ).
## Other information
System logs often contain a large volume of information, much of which is extraneous to information security monitoring. To help identify significant events for information security monitoring purposes, the use of suitable utility programs or audit tools to perform file interrogation can be considered.
Event logging sets the foundation for automated monitoring systems (see ) which are capable of generating consolidated reports and alerts on system security.
A SIEM tool or equivalent service can be used to store, correlate, normalize and analyse log information , and  to  generate  alerts.  SIEMs  tend  to  require  careful  configuration  to  optimize  their  benefits. Configurations to consider include identification and selection of appropriate log sources, tuning and testing of rules and development of use cases.
Public transparency files for the recording of logs are used, for example, in certificate transparency systems.  Such  files  can  provide  an  additional  detection  mechanism  useful  for  guarding  against log tampering.
In  cloud  environments,  log  management  responsibilities  can  be  shared  between  the  cloud  service customer and the cloud service provider. Responsibilities vary depending on the type of cloud service being used. Further guidance can be found in ISO/IEC 27017.
##  Monitoring activities
| Control type           | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities                 | Security domains   |
|------------------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|------------------------------------------|--------------------|
| #Detective #Corrective | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Detect #Respond         | #Information_securi- ty_event_management | #Defence           |
## Control
Networks, systems and applications should be monitored for anomalous behaviour and appropriate actions taken to evaluate potential information security incidents.
## Purpose
To detect anomalous behaviour and potential information security incidents.
## Guidance
The monitoring scope and level should be determined in accordance with business and information security requirements and taking into consideration relevant laws and regulations. Monitoring records should be maintained for defined retention periods.
The following should be considered for inclusion within the monitoring system:
- a) outbound and inbound network, system and application traffic;
- b) access to systems, servers, networking equipment, monitoring system, critical applications, etc.;
- c) critical or admin level system and network configuration files;
- d) logs from security tools [e.g. antivirus, IDS, intrusion prevention system (IPS), web filters, firewalls, data leakage prevention];
- e) event logs relating to system and network activity;
- f) checking that the code being executed is authorized to run in the system and that it has not been tampered with (e.g. by recompilation to add additional unwanted code);
- g) use of the resources (e.g. CPU, hard disks, memory, bandwidth) and their performance.
The organization should establish a baseline of normal behaviour and monitor against this baseline for anomalies. When establishing a baseline, the following should be considered:
- a) reviewing utilization of systems at normal and peak periods;
- b) usual time of access, location of access, frequency of access for each user or group of users.
The monitoring system should be configured against the established baseline to identify anomalous behaviour, such as:
- a) unplanned termination of processes or applications;
- b) activity typically associated with malware or traffic originating from known malicious IP addresses or network domains (e.g. those associated with botnet command and control servers);
- c) known attack characteristics (e.g. denial of service and buffer overflows);
- d) unusual  system  behaviour  (e.g.  keystroke  logging,  process  injection  and  deviations  in  use  of standard protocols);
- e) bottlenecks and overloads (e.g. network queuing, latency levels and network jitter);
- f) unauthorized access (actual or attempted) to systems or information;
- g) unauthorized scanning of business applications, systems and networks;
- h) successful and unsuccessful attempts to access protected resources (e.g. DNS servers, web portals and file systems);
- i) unusual user and system behaviour in relation to expected behaviour.
Continuous monitoring via a monitoring tool should be used. Monitoring should be done in real time or in periodic intervals, subject to organizational need and capabilities. Monitoring tools should include the ability to handle large amounts of data, adapt to a constantly changing threat landscape, and allow for  real-time notification. The tools should also be able to recognize specific signatures and data or network or application behaviour patterns.
Automated monitoring software should be configured to generate alerts (e.g. via management consoles, email messages or instant messaging systems) based on predefined thresholds. The alerting system should be tuned and trained on the organization's baseline to minimize false positives. Personnel should be  dedicated  to  respond  to  alerts  and  should  be  properly  trained  to  accurately  interpret  potential incidents. There should be redundant systems and processes in place to receive and respond to alert notifications.
Abnormal  events  should  be  communicated  to  relevant  parties  in  order  to  improve  the  following activities: auditing, security evaluation, vulnerability scanning and monitoring (see ). Procedures should be in place to respond to positive indicators from the monitoring system in a timely manner, in order to minimize the effect of adverse events (see ) on information security. Procedures should also be established to identify and address false positives including tuning the monitoring software to reduce the number of future false positives.
## Other information
Security monitoring can be enhanced by:
- a) leveraging threat intelligence systems (see  );
- b) leveraging machine learning and artificial intelligence capabilities;
- c) using blocklists or allowlists;
- d) undertaking a range of technical security assessments (e.g. vulnerability assessments, penetration testing,  cyber-attack  simulations  and  cyber  response  exercises),  and  using  the  results  of  these assessments to help determine baselines or acceptable behaviour;
- e) using performance monitoring systems to help establish and detect anomalous behaviour;
- f) leveraging logs in combination with monitoring systems.
Monitoring  activities  are  often  conducted  using  specialist  software,  such  as  intrusion  detection systems.  These  can  be  configured  to  a  baseline  of  normal,  acceptable  and  expected  system  and network activities.
Monitoring  for  anomalous  communications  helps  in  the  identification  of  botnets  (i.e.  set  of  devices under the malicious control of the botnet owner, usually used for mounting distributed denial of service attacks on other computers of other organizations). If the computer is being controlled by an external device,  there  is  a  communication  between  the  infected  device  and  the  controller.  The  organization should therefore employ technologies to monitor for anomalous communications and take such action as necessary.
##  Clock synchronization
| Control type   | Information security properties   | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities                 | Security domains     |
|----------------|-----------------------------------|--------------------------|------------------------------------------|----------------------|
| #Detective     | #Integrity                        | #Protect #Detect         | #Information_securi- ty_event_management | #Protection #Defence |
## Control
The  clocks  of  information  processing  systems  used  by  the  organization  should  be  synchronized  to approved time sources.
## Purpose
To  enable  the  correlation  and  analysis  of  security-related  events  and  other  recorded  data,  and  to support investigations into information security incidents.
## Guidance
External  and  internal  requirements  for  time  representation,  reliable  synchronization  and  accuracy should be documented and implemented. Such requirements can be from legal, statutory, regulatory, contractual, standards and internal monitoring needs. A standard reference time for use within the organization should be defined and considered for all systems, including building management systems, entry and exit systems and others that can be used to aid investigations.
A clock linked to a radio time broadcast from a national atomic clock or global positioning system (GPS) should be used as the reference clock for logging systems; a consistent, trusted date and time source to ensure accurate time-stamps. Protocols such as network time protocol (NTP) or precision time protocol (PTP) should be used to keep all networked systems in synchronization with a reference clock.
The organization can use two external time sources at the same time in order to improve the reliability of external clocks, and appropriately manage any variance.
Clock synchronization can be difficult when using multiple cloud services or when using both cloud and on-premises services. 