Vendor  supplied  software  used  in  operational  systems  should  be  maintained  at  a  level  supported by  the  supplier.  Over  time,  software  vendors  will  cease  to  support  older  versions  of  software.  The organization should consider the risks of relying on unsupported software. Open source software used in  operational systems should be maintained to the latest appropriate release of the software. Over time, open source code can cease to be maintained but is still available in an open source software repository. The organization should also consider the risks of relying on unmaintained open source software when used in operational systems.
When  suppliers  are  involved  in  installing  or  updating  software,  physical  or  logical  access  should only be given when necessary and with appropriate authorization. The supplier's activities should be monitored (see ).
The organization should define and enforce strict rules on which types of software users can install.
The  principle  of  least  privilege  should  be  applied  to  software  installation  on  operational  systems. The organization should identify what types of software installations are permitted (e.g. updates and security  patches  to  existing  software)  and  what  types  of  installations  are  prohibited  (e.g.  software that is only for personal use and software whose pedigree with regard to being potentially malicious is unknown or suspect). These privileges should be granted based on the roles of the users concerned.
## Other information
No other information.
