Clause A.2 includes examples of such attributes.
##  Control layout
The layout for each control contains the following:
- -Control title: Short name of the control;
- -Attribute	table : A table shows the value(s) of each attribute for the given control;
- -Control: What the control is;
- -Purpose : Why the control should be implemented;
- -Guidance: How the control should be implemented;
- -Other information: Explanatory text or references to other related documents.
Subheadings are used in the guidance text for some controls to aid readability where guidance is lengthy and addresses multiple topics. Such headings are not necessarily used in all guidance text. Subheadings are underlined.
## 5 Organizational controls
##  Policies for information security
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities   | Security domains                        |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|-----------------------------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Identify                | #Governance                | #Governance_and_Eco- system #Resilience |
## Control
Information security policy and topic-specific  policies  should  be  defined,  approved  by  management, published, communicated to and acknowledged by relevant personnel and relevant interested parties, and reviewed at planned intervals and if significant changes occur.
## Purpose
To  ensure  continuing  suitability,  adequacy,  effectiveness  of  management  direction  and  support for  information  security  in  accordance  with  business,  legal,  statutory,  regulatory  and  contractual requirements.
## Guidance
At the highest level, the organization should define an 'information security policy' which is approved by top management and which sets out the organization's approach to managing its information security.
The information security policy should take into consideration requirements derived from:
- a) business strategy and requirements;
- b) regulations, legislation and contracts;
- c) the current and projected information security risks and threats.
The information security policy should contain statements concerning:
- a) definition of information security;
- b) information security objectives or the framework for setting information security objectives;
- c) principles to guide all activities relating to information security;
- d) commitment to satisfy applicable requirements related to information security;
- e) commitment to continual improvement of the information security management system;
- f) assignment of responsibilities for information security management to defined roles;
- g) procedures for handling exemptions and exceptions.
Top management should approve any changes to the information security policy.
At  a  lower  level,  the  information  security  policy  should  be  supported  by  topic-specific  policies  as needed, to further mandate the implementation of information security controls. Topic-specific policies are  typically  structured  to  address  the  needs  of  certain  target  groups  within  an  organization  or  to cover certain security areas. Topic-specific policies should be aligned with and complementary to the information security policy of the organization.
Examples of such topics include:
- a) access control;
- b) physical and environmental security;
- c) asset management;
- d) information transfer;
- e) secure configuration and handling of user endpoint devices;
- f) networking security;
- g) information security incident management;
- h) backup;
- i) cryptography and key management;
- j) information classification and handling;
- k) management of technical vulnerabilities;
- l) secure development.
The responsibility for  the  development,  review  and  approval  of  the  topic-specific  policies  should  be allocated to relevant personnel based on their appropriate level of authority and technical competency. The review should include assessing opportunities for improvement of the organization's information security policy and topic-specific policies and managing information security in response to changes to:
- a) the organization's business strategy;
- b) the organization's technical environment;
- c) regulations, statutes, legislation and contracts;
- d) information security risks;
- e) the current and projected information security threat environment;
- f) lessons learned from information security events and incidents.
The  review  of  information  security  policy  and  topic-specific  policies  should  take  the  results  of management reviews and audits into account. Review and update of other related policies should be considered when one policy is changed to maintain consistency.
The  information  security  policy  and  topic-specific  policies  should  be  communicated  to  relevant personnel  and  interested  parties  in  a  form  that  is  relevant,  accessible  and  understandable  to  the intended reader. Recipients of the policies should be required to acknowledge they understand and agree  to  comply  with  the  policies  where  applicable.  The  organization  can  determine  the  formats and names of these policy documents that meet the organization's needs. 