Table 1 illustrates the differences between information security policy and topic-specific policy.
Table	1	-	Differences	between	information	security	policy	and	topic-specific	policy
|                                     | Information security policy   | Topic-specific policy           |
|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------|---------------------------------|
| Level of detail                     | General or high-level         | Specific and detailed           |
| Documented and formally approved by | Top management                | Appropriate level of management |
## Other information
Topic-specific policies can vary across organizations.
##  Information	security	roles	and	responsibilities
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities   | Security domains                                    |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Identify                | #Governance                | #Governance_and_Ecosys- tem #Protection #Resilience |
## Control
Information  security  roles  and  responsibilities  should  be  defined  and  allocated  according  to  the organization needs.
## Purpose
To  establish  a  defined,  approved  and  understood  structure  for  the  implementation,  operation  and management of information security within the organization.
## Guidance
Allocation  of  information  security  roles  and  responsibilities  should  be  done  in  accordance  with  the information security policy and topic-specific policies  (see  ).  The  organization  should  define  and manage responsibilities for:
- a) protection of information and other associated assets;
- b) carrying out specific information security processes;
- c) information security risk management activities and in particular acceptance of residual risks (e.g. to risk owners);
- d) all personnel using an organization's information and other associated assets.
These  responsibilities  should  be  supplemented,  where  necessary,  with  more  detailed  guidance  for specific  sites  and  information  processing  facilities.  Individuals  with  allocated  information  security responsibilities  can  assign  security  tasks  to  others.  However,  they  remain  accountable  and  should determine that any delegated tasks have been correctly performed.
Each  security  area  for  which  individuals  are  responsible  should  be  defined,  documented  and communicated.  Authorization  levels  should  be  defined  and  documented.  Individuals  who  take  on  a specific information security role should be competent in the knowledge and skills required by the role and should be supported to keep up to date with developments related to the role and required in order to fulfil the responsibilities of the role.
## Other information
Many organizations  appoint  an  information  security  manager  to  take  overall  responsibility  for  the development and implementation of information security and to support the identification of risks and mitigating controls.
However, responsibility for resourcing and implementing the controls often remains with individual managers. One common practice is to appoint an owner for each asset who then becomes responsible for its day-to-day protection.
Depending  on  the  size  and  resourcing  of  an  organization,  information  security  can  be  covered  by dedicated roles or duties carried out in addition to existing roles.
##  Segregation of duties
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities                      | Security domains            |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #Governance #Identity_and_ac- cess_management | #Governance_and_Ecosys- tem |
## Control
Conflicting duties and conflicting areas of responsibility should be segregated.
## Purpose
To reduce the risk of fraud, error and bypassing of information security controls.
## Guidance
Segregation of duties and areas of responsibility aims to separate conflicting duties between different individuals in order to prevent one individual from executing potential conflicting duties on their own.
The organization should determine which duties and areas of responsibility need to be segregated. The following are examples of activities that can require segregation:
- a) initiating, approving and executing a change;
- b) requesting, approving and implementing access rights;
- c) designing, implementing and reviewing code;
- d) developing software and administering production systems;
- e) using and administering applications;
- f) using applications and administering databases;
- g) designing, auditing and assuring information security controls.
The  possibility  of  collusion  should  be  considered  in  designing  the  segregation  controls.  Small organizations can find segregation of duties difficult to achieve, but the principle should be applied as  far  as  is  possible  and  practicable.  Whenever  it  is  difficult  to  segregate,  other  controls  should  be considered, such as monitoring of activities, audit trails and management supervision.
Care should be taken when using role-based access control systems to ensure that persons are not granted conflicting roles. When there is a large number of roles, the organization should consider using automated tools to identify conflicts and facilitate their removal. 