The  same  considerations  apply  to  monitoring  of  the  monitoring  systems deployed in development, test and production settings. Judgement is needed, guided by the sensitivity of the systems and data, to determine how many layers of meta-testing are useful.
##  Outsourced development
| Control type           | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts     | Operational capabilities                                                              | Security domains                       |
|------------------------|-------------------------------------------|----------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|
| #Preventive #Detective | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Identify #Protect #Detect | #System_and_network_ security #Application_security #Supplier_relationships_ security | #Governance_and_ Ecosystem #Protection |
## Control
The  organization  should  direct,  monitor  and  review  the  activities  related  to  outsourced  system development.
## Purpose
To ensure information security measures required by the organization are implemented in outsourced system development.
## Guidance
Where  system development is outsourced, the organization should communicate and agree requirements and expectations, and continually monitor and review whether the delivery of outsourced work meets these expectations. The following points should be considered across the organization's entire external supply chain:
- a) licensing agreements, code ownership and intellectual property rights related to the outsourced content (see  );
- b) contractual requirements for secure design, coding and testing practices (see  to  );
- c) provision of the threat model to consider by external developers;
- d) acceptance testing for the quality and accuracy of the deliverables (see  );
- e) provision  of  evidence  that  minimum  acceptable  levels  of  security  and  privacy  capabilities  are established (e.g. assurance reports);
- f) provision  of  evidence  that  sufficient  testing  has  been  applied  to  guard  against  the  presence  of malicious content (both intentional and unintentional) upon delivery;
- g) provision  of  evidence  that  sufficient  testing  has  been  applied  to  guard  against  the  presence  of known vulnerabilities;
- h) escrow agreements for the software source code (e.g. if the supplier goes out of business);
- i) contractual right to audit development processes and controls;
- j) security requirements for the development environment (see  );
- k) taking consideration of applicable legislation (e.g. on protection of personal data).
## Other information
Further information on supplier relationships can be found in the ISO/IEC 27036 series.
##  Separation of development, test and production environments
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities                             | Security domains   |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|--------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #Application_security #System_and_net- work_security | #Protection        |
## Control
Development, testing and production environments should be separated and secured.
## Purpose
To protect the production environment and data from compromise by development and test activities.
## Guidance
The level of separation between production, testing and development environments that is necessary to prevent production problems should be identified and implemented.
The following items should be considered:
- a) adequately  separating  development  and  production  systems  and  operating  them  in  different domains (e.g. in separate virtual or physical environments);
- b) defining, documenting and implementing rules and authorization for the deployment of software from development to production status;
- c) testing changes to production systems and applications in a testing or staging environment prior to being applied to production systems (see  );
- d) not testing  in  production  environments  except  in  circumstances  that  have  been  defined and approved;
- e) compilers,  editors  and  other  development  tools  or  utility  programs  not  being  accessible  from production systems when not required;
- f) displaying appropriate environment identification labels in menus to reduce the risk of error;
- g) not copying sensitive information into the development and testing system environments unless equivalent controls are provided for the development and testing systems.
In all cases, development and testing environments should be protected considering:
- a) patching  and  updating  of  all  the  development,  integration  and  testing  tools  (including  builders, integrators, compilers, configuration systems and libraries);
- b) secure configuration of systems and software;
- c) control of access to the environments;
- d) monitoring of change to the environment and code stored therein;
- e) secure monitoring of the environments;
- f) taking backups of the environments.
A  single  person  should  not  have  the  ability  to  make  changes  to  both  development  and  production without prior review and approval. This can be achieved for example through segregation of access rights  or  through  rules  that  are  monitored.  In  exceptional  situations,  additional  measures  such as  detailed  logging  and  real-time  monitoring  should  be  implemented  in  order  to  detect  and  act  on unauthorized changes.
## Other information
Without  adequate  measures  and  procedures,  developers  and  testers  having  access  to  production systems can introduce significant risks (e.g. unwanted modification of files or system environment, system  failure,  running  unauthorized  and  untested  code  in  production  systems,  disclosure  of confidential data, data integrity and availability issues). There is a need to maintain a known and stable environment in which to perform meaningful testing and to prevent inappropriate developer access to the production environment.
Measures  and  procedures  include  carefully designed  roles  in  conjunction  with  implementing segregation of duty requirements and having adequate monitoring processes in place.
Development and testing personnel also pose a threat to the confidentiality of production information. Development and testing activities can cause unintended changes to software or information if they share the same computing environment. Separating development, testing and production environments is  therefore  desirable  to  reduce  the  risk  of  accidental  change  or  unauthorized  access  to  production software and business data (see  for the protection of test information).
In  some  cases,  the  distinction  between  development,  test  and  production  environments  can  be deliberately blurred and testing can be carried out in a development environment or through controlled rollouts to live users or servers (e.g. small population of pilot users). In some cases, product testing can occur through live use of the product inside the organization. Furthermore, to reduce downtime of live deployments, two identical production environments can be supported where only one is live at any one time.
Supporting processes for the use of production data in development and testing environments () are necessary.
Organizations can also consider the guidance provided in this section for training environments when conducting end user training.
##  Change management
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities                             | Security domains   |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|--------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #Application_security #System_and_net- work_security | #Protection        |
## Control
Changes  to  information  processing  facilities  and  information  systems  should  be  subject  to  change management procedures.
