with mechanical keys or PINs);
- 5) use of fibre-optic cables;
- d) labelling cables at each end with sufficient source and destination details to enable the physical identification and inspection of the cable.
Specialist  advice  should  be  sought  on  how  to  manage  risks  arising  from  cabling  incidents  or malfunctions.
## Other information
Sometimes power and telecommunications cabling are shared resources for more than one organization occupying co-located premises.
##  Equipment maintenance
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities             | Security domains        |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------------------|-------------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #Physical_security #Asset_management | #Protection #Resilience |
## Control
Equipment  should  be  maintained  correctly  to  ensure  availability,  integrity  and  confidentiality  of information.
## Purpose
To  prevent  loss,  damage,  theft  or  compromise  of  information  and  other  associated  assets  and interruption to the organization's operations caused by lack of maintenance.
## Guidance
The following guidelines for equipment maintenance should be considered:
- a) maintaining  equipment  in  accordance  with  the  supplier's  recommended  service  frequency  and specifications;
- b) implementing and monitoring of a maintenance programme by the organization;
- c) only authorized maintenance personnel carrying out repairs and maintenance on equipment;
- d) keeping records of all suspected or actual faults, and of all preventive and corrective maintenance;
- e) implementing  appropriate  controls  when  equipment  is  scheduled  for  maintenance,  taking  into account whether this maintenance is performed by personnel on site or external to the organization; subjecting the maintenance personnel to a suitable confidentiality agreement;
- f) supervising maintenance personnel when carrying out maintenance on site;
- g) authorizing and controlling access for remote maintenance;
- h) applying security measures for assets off-premises (see ) if equipment containing information is taken off premises for maintenance;
- i) complying with all maintenance requirements imposed by insurance;
- j) before putting equipment back into operation after maintenance, inspecting it to ensure that the equipment has not been tampered with and is functioning properly;
- k) applying measures for secure disposal or re-use of equipment (see ) if it is determined that equipment is to be disposed of.
## Other information
Equipment includes technical components of information processing facilities, uninterruptible power supply (UPS) and batteries, power generators, power alternators and converters, physical intrusion detection systems and alarms, smoke detectors, fire extinguishers, air conditioning and lifts.
##  Secure disposal or re-use of equipment
| Control type   | Information security properties   | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities             | Security domains   |
|----------------|-----------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality                  | #Protect                 | #Physical_security #Asset_management | #Protection        |
## Control
Items of equipment containing storage media should be verified to ensure that any sensitive data and licensed software has been removed or securely overwritten prior to disposal or re-use.
## Purpose
To prevent leakage of information from equipment to be disposed or re-used.
## Guidance
Equipment  should  be  verified  to  ensure  whether  or  not  storage  media  is  contained  prior  to disposal or re-use.
Storage media containing confidential or copyrighted information should be physically destroyed or the  information  should  be  destroyed,  deleted  or  overwritten  using  techniques  to  make  the  original information  non-retrievable  rather  than  using  the  standard  delete  function.  See    for  detailed guidance on secure disposal of storage media and  for guidance on information deletion.
Labels  and  markings  identifying  the  organization  or  indicating  the  classification,  owner,  system  or network, should be removed prior to disposal, including reselling or donating to charity.
The organization should consider the removal of security controls such as access controls or surveillance equipment at the end of lease or when moving out of premises. This depends on factors such as:
- a) its lease agreement to return the facility to original condition;
- b) minimizing the risk of leaving systems with sensitive information on them for the next tenant (e.g. user access lists, video or image files);
- c) the ability to reuse the controls at the next facility.
## Other information
Damaged equipment containing storage media can require a risk assessment to determine whether the items should be physically destroyed rather than sent for repair or discarded. Information can be compromised through careless disposal or re-use of equipment.
In addition to secure disk deletion, full-disk encryption reduces the risk of disclosure of confidential information when equipment is disposed of or redeployed, provided that:
- a) the  encryption  process  is  sufficiently  strong  and  covers  the  entire  disk  (including  slack  space, swap files);
- b) the cryptographic keys are long enough to resist brute force attacks;
- c) the cryptographic keys are themselves kept confidential (e.g. never stored on the same disk).
For further advice on cryptography, see .
Techniques for securely overwriting storage media differ according to the storage media technology and  the  classification  level  of  the  information  on  the  storage  media.  Overwriting  tools  should  be reviewed to make sure that they are applicable to the technology of the storage media.
See ISO/IEC 27040 for detail on methods for sanitizing storage media.
## 8 Technological controls
##  User endpoint devices
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities                  | Security do- mains   |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------------------|----------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #Asset_management #Information_protection | #Protection          |
## Control
Information stored on, processed by or accessible via user endpoint devices should be protected.
