Using algorithms for the purpose of file integrity checking;
- c) non-repudiation: using cryptographic techniques to provide evidence of the occurrence or nonoccurrence of an event or action;
- d) authentication:  using  cryptographic  techniques  to  authenticate  users  and  other  system  entities requesting access to or transacting with system users, entities and resources.
The ISO/IEC 11770 series provides further information on key management.
##  Secure development life cycle
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities                             | Security domains   |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|--------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #Application_security #System_and_net- work_security | #Protection        |
## Control
Rules for the secure development of software and systems should be established and applied.
## Purpose
To ensure information security is designed and implemented within the secure development life cycle of software and systems.
## Guidance
Secure development is a requirement to build up a secure service, architecture, software and system. To achieve this, the following aspects should be considered:
- a) separation of development, test and production environments (see  );
- b) guidance on the security in the software development life cycle:
- 1) security in the software development methodology (see  and  );
- 2) secure coding guidelines for each programming language used (see  );
- c) security requirements in the specification and design phase (see  );
- d) security checkpoints in projects (see  );
- e) system and security testing, such as regression testing, code scan and penetration tests (see  );
- f) secure repositories for source code and configuration (see  and  );
- g) security in the version control (see  );
- h) required application security knowledge and training (see  );
- i) developers' capability for preventing, finding and fixing vulnerabilities (see  );
- j) licensing  requirements and alternatives to ensure cost-effective solutions while avoiding future licensing issues (See ).
If development is outsourced, the organization should obtain assurance that the supplier complies with the organization's rules for secure development (see ).
## Other information
Development can also take place inside applications, such as office applications, scripting, browsers and databases.
##  Application security requirements
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities                             | Security domains     |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|----------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #Application_security #System_and_net- work_security | #Protection #Defence |
## Control
Information security requirements should be identified, specified and approved when developing or acquiring applications.
## Purpose
To  ensure  all  information  security  requirements  are  identified  and  addressed  when  developing  or acquiring applications.
## Guidance
## General
Application security requirements should be identified and specified. These requirements are usually determined through a risk  assessment.  The  requirements  should  be  developed  with  the  support  of information security specialists.
Application security requirements can cover a wide range of topics, depending on the purpose of the application.
Application security requirements should include, as applicable:
- a) level of trust in identity of entities [e.g. through authentication (see ,  and  )];
- b) identifying the type of information and classification level to be processed by the application;
- c) need for segregation of access and level of access to data and functions in the application;
- d) resilience  against  malicious  attacks  or  unintentional  disruptions  [e.g.  protection  against  buffer overflow or structured query language (SQL) injections];
- e) legal, statutory and regulatory requirements in the jurisdiction where the transaction is generated, processed, completed or stored;
- f) need for privacy associated with all parties involved;
- g) the protection requirements of any confidential information;
- h) protection of data while being processed, in transit and at rest;
- i) need to securely encrypt communications between all involved parties;
- j) input controls, including integrity checks and input validation;
- k) automated controls (e.g. approval limits or dual approvals);
- l) output controls, also considering who can access outputs and its authorization;
- m)  restrictions  around  content  of  "free-text"  fields,  as  these  can  lead  to  uncontrolled  storage  of confidential data (e.g. personal data);
- n) requirements  derived  from  the  business  process,  such  as  transaction  logging  and  monitoring, nonrepudiation requirements;
- o) requirements mandated by other security controls (e.g. interfaces to logging and monitoring or data leakage detection systems);
- p) error message handling.
Transactional services
Additionally, for applications offering transactional services between the organization and a partner, the following should be considered when identifying information security requirements:
- a) the level of trust each party requires in each other's claimed identity;
- b) the  level  of  trust  required  in  the  integrity  of  information  exchanged  or  processed  and  the mechanisms for identification of lack of integrity (e.g.  cyclic  redundancy  check,  hashing,  digital signatures);
- c) authorization  processes  associated  with  who  can  approve  contents  of,  issue  or  sign  key transactional documents;
- d) confidentiality, integrity, proof of dispatch and receipt of key documents and the non-repudiation (e.g. contracts associated with tendering and contract processes);
- e) the  confidentiality  and  integrity  of  any  transactions  (e.g.  orders,  delivery  address  details  and confirmation of receipts);
- f) requirements on how long to maintain a transaction confidential;
- g) insurance and other contractual requirements.
Electronic ordering and payment applications
Additionally,  for  applications  involving  electronic  ordering  and  payment,  the  following  should be considered:
- a) requirements for maintaining the confidentiality and integrity of order information;
- b) the degree of verification appropriate to verify payment information supplied by a customer;
- c) avoidance of loss or duplication of transaction information;
- d) storing transaction details outside of any publicly accessible environment (e.g. on a storage platform existing on the organizational intranet, and not retained and exposed on electronic storage media directly accessible from the internet);
- e) where  a  trusted  authority  is  used  (e.g.  for  the  purposes  of  issuing  and  maintaining  digital signatures or digital certificates) security is integrated and embedded throughout the entire endto-end certificate or signature management process.
Several of the above considerations can be addressed by the application of cryptography (see ), taking into consideration legal requirements (see  to , especially see  for cryptography legislation).
## Other information
Applications accessible via networks are subject to a range of network related threats, such as fraudulent activities, contract disputes or disclosure of information to the public; incomplete transmission, misrouting, unauthorized message alteration, duplication or replay. Therefore, detailed risk assessments and careful determination of controls are indispensable. Controls required often include cryptographic methods for authentication and securing data transfer.
Further information on application security can be found in the ISO/IEC 27034 series.
##  Secure system architecture and engineering principles
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities                             | Security domains   |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|--------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #Application_security #System_and_net- work_security | #Protection        |
## Control
Principles for engineering secure systems should be established, documented, maintained and applied to any information system development activities.
## Purpose
To  ensure  information  systems  are  securely  designed,  implemented  and  operated  within  the development life cycle.
## Guidance
Security  engineering  principles  should  be  established,  documented  and  applied  to  information system engineering activities. Security should be designed into all architecture layers (business, data, applications  and  technology).  New  technology  should  be  analysed  for  security  risks  and  the  design should be reviewed against known attack patterns.
Secure  engineering  principles  provide  guidance  on  user  authentication  techniques,  secure  session control and data validation and sanitisation.
Secure system engineering principles should include analysis of:
- a) the full range  of  security  controls  required  to  protect  information  and  systems  against identified threats;
- b) the capabilities of security controls to prevent, detect or respond to security events;
- c) specific security controls required by particular business processes (e.g. encryption of sensitive information, integrity checking and digitally signing information);
- d) where and how security controls are to be applied (e.g. by integrating with a security architecture and the technical infrastructure);
- e) how individual security controls (manual and automated) work together to produce an integrated set of controls.
Security engineering principles should take account of:
- a) the need to integrate with a security architecture;
- b) technical  security  infrastructure  [e.g.  public  key  infrastructure  (PKI),  identity  and  access management (IAM), data leakage prevention and dynamic access management];
- c) capability of the organization to develop and support the chosen technology;
- d) cost, time and complexity of meeting security requirements;
- e) current good practices.
Secure system engineering should involve:
- a) the  use  of  security  architecture  principles,  such  as  'security  by  design',  'defence  in  depth', 'security  by  default',  'default  deny',  'fail  securely',  'distrust  input  from  external  applications', 'security  in  deployment',  'assume  breach',  "least  privilege",  'usability  and  manageability'  and 'least functionality';
- b) a  security-oriented  design  review  to  help  identify  information  security  vulnerabilities,  ensure security controls are specified and meet security requirements;
- c) documentation  and  formal  acknowledgement  of  security  controls  that  do  not  fully  meet requirements (e.g. due to overriding safety requirements);
- d) hardening of systems.
The organization should consider "zero trust" principles such as:
- a) assuming the organization's information systems are already breached and thus not be reliant on network perimeter security alone;
- b) employing a 'never trust and always verify' approach for access to information systems;
- c) ensuring that requests to information systems are encrypted end-to-end;
- d) verifying each request to an information system as if it originated from an open, external network, even  if  these  requests  originated  internal  to  the  organization  (i.e.  not  automatically  trusting anything inside or outside its perimeters);
- e) using "least privilege" and dynamic access control techniques (see ,  and ). This includes authenticating  and  authorizing  requests  for  information  or  to  systems  based  on  contextual information such as authentication information (see ), user identities (see ), data about the user endpoint device, and data classification (see  );
- f) always  authenticating  requesters  and  always  validating  authorization  requests  to  information systems based on information including authentication information (see ) and user identities ( ), data about the user endpoint device, and data classification (see ), for example enforcing strong authentication (e.g. multi-factor, see ).
The  established  security  engineering  principles  should  be  applied,  where  applicable,  to  outsourced development of information systems through the contracts and other binding agreements between the organization and the supplier to whom the organization outsources. The organization should ensure that suppliers' security engineering practices align with the organization's needs.
The security engineering principles and the established engineering procedures should be regularly reviewed to ensure that they are effectively contributing to enhanced standards of security within the  engineering  process.  They  should  also  be  regularly  reviewed  to  ensure  that  they  remain  up-todate in terms of combatting any new potential threats and in remaining applicable to advances in the technologies and solutions being applied.
## Other information
Secure engineering principles can be applied to the design or configuration of a range of techniques, such as:
- -fault tolerance and other resilience techniques;
- -segregation (e.g. through virtualization or containerization);
- -tamper resistance.
Secure virtualization techniques can be used to prevent interference between applications running on the same physical device. If a virtual instance of an application is compromised by an attacker, only that instance is affected. The attack has no effect on any other application or data.
Tamper  resistance  techniques  can  be  used  to  detect  tampering  of  information  containers,  whether physical (e.g. a burglar alarm) or logical (e.g. a data file). A characteristic of such techniques is that there is a record of the attempt to tamper with the container. In addition, the control can prevent the successful extraction of data through its destruction (e.g. device memory can be deleted).
##  Secure coding
| Control type   | Information security properties           | Cybersecurity concepts   | Operational capabilities                            | Security do- mains   |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|----------------------|
| #Preventive    | #Confidentiality #Integrity #Availability | #Protect                 | #Application_security #System_and_network_ security | #Protection          |
## Control
Secure coding principles should be applied to software development.
## Purpose
To ensure software is written securely thereby reducing the number of potential information security vulnerabilities in the software.
## Guidance
## General
The organization should establish organization-wide processes to provide good governance for secure coding.  A  minimum secure baseline should be established and applied. 