In  the  case  of  the  products  without  an  intended  medical  purpose  listed  in  Annex  XVI,  the  requirement  to demonstrate  a  clinical  benefit  in  accordance  with  this  Chapter  and  Annexes  XIV  and  XV  shall  be  understood  as a  requirement  to  demonstrate  the  performance  of  the  device.  Clinical  evaluations  of  those  products  shall  be  based  on relevant  data  concerning  safety,  including  data  from  post-market  surveillance,  PMCF,  and,  where  applicable,  specific clinical  investigation.  Clinical  investigations  shall  be  performed  for  those  products  unless  reliance  on  existing  clinical data from an analogous medical device is duly justified.
- 10. Without  prejudice  to  paragraph  4,  where  the  demonstration  of  conformity  with  general  safety  and  performance requirements  based  on  clinical  data  is  not  deemed  appropriate,  adequate  justification  for  any  such  exception  shall  be given  based  on  the  results  of  the  manufacturer's  risk  management  and  on  consideration  of  the  specifics  of  the interaction between  the  device and  the human  body,  the  clinical performance  intended  and  the  claims of the manufacturer.  In  such  a  case,  the  manufacturer  shall  duly  substantiate  in  the  technical  documentation  referred  to  in Annex  II  why  it  considers  a  demonstration  of  conformity  with  general  safety  and  performance  requirements  that  is based  on  the  results  of  non-clinical  testing  methods  alone,  including  performance  evaluation,  bench  testing  and  preclinical evaluation, to be adequate.
- 11. The  clinical  evaluation  and  its  documentation  shall  be  updated  throughout  the  life  cycle  of  the  device  concerned with  clinical  data  obtained  from  the  implementation  of  the  manufacturer's  PMCF  plan  in  accordance  with  Part  B  of Annex XIV and the post-market surveillance plan referred to in Article 84.
For  class  III  devices  and  implantable  devices,  the  PMCF  evaluation  report  and,  if  indicated,  the  summary  of  safety  and clinical performance referred to in Article 32 shall be updated at least annually with such data.
- 12. The  clinical  evaluation,  its  results  and  the  clinical  evidence  derived  from  it  shall  be  documented  in  a  clinical evaluation  report  as  referred  to  in  Section  4  of  Annex  XIV,  which,  except  for  custom-made  devices,  shall  be  part  of  the technical documentation referred to in Annex II relating to the device concerned.
- 13. Where  necessary  to  ensure  the  uniform  application  of  Annex  XIV,  the  Commission  may,  having  due  regard  to technical and scientific progress, adopt implementing acts to the extent necessary to resolve issues of divergent interpret­ ation  and  of  practical  application.  Those  implementing  acts  shall  be  adopted  in  accordance  with  the  examination procedure referred to in Article 114(3).
## Article 62
## General  requirements  regarding  clinical  investigations  conducted  to  demonstrate  conformity  of devices
- 1. Clinical  investigations  shall  be  designed,  authorised,  conducted,  recorded  and  reported  in  accordance  with  the provisions  of  this  Article  and  of  Articles  63  to  80,  the  acts  adopted  pursuant  to  Article  81,  and  Annex  XV,  where carried  out  as  part  of  the  clinical  evaluation  for  conformity  assessment  purposes,  for  one  or  more  of  the  following purposes:
- (a)   to  establish  and  verify  that,  under  normal  conditions  of  use,  a  device  is  designed,  manufactured  and  packaged  in such  a  way  that  it  is  suitable  for  one  or  more  of  the  specific  purposes  listed  in  point  (1)  of  Article  2,  and  achieves the performance intended as specified by its manufacturer; - (b)   to establish and verify the clinical benefits of a device as specified by its manufacturer;
- (c)   to  establish  and  verify  the  clinical  safety  of  the  device  and  to  determine  any  undesirable  side-effects,  under  normal conditions  of  use  of  the  device,  and  assess  whether  they  constitute  acceptable  risks  when  weighed  against  the benefits to be achieved by the device.
- 2. Where  the  sponsor  of  a  clinical  investigation  is  not  established  in  the  Union,  that  sponsor  shall  ensure  that a  natural  or  legal  person  is  established  in  the  Union  as  its  legal  representative.  Such  legal  representative  shall  be responsible  for  ensuring  compliance  with  the  sponsor's  obligations  pursuant  to  this  Regulation,  and  shall  be  the addressee  for  all  communications  with  the  sponsor  provided  for  in  this  Regulation.  Any communication  with  that  legal representative shall be deemed to be a communication with the sponsor.
Member States may choose not to apply the first  subparagraph  to clinical  investigations to be  conducted  solely on  their territory,  or  on  their  territory  and  the  territory of  a  third  country,  provided  that  they ensure  that  the  sponsor  establishes at  least  a  contact  person  on  their  territory  in  respect  of  that  clinical  investigation  who  shall  be  the  addressee  for  all communications with the sponsor provided for in this Regulation.
