Nonetheless,  it  is  necessary  that  any  designation  of a  notified  body  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  this  Regulation  prior  to  the  date  of  its  application  be without  prejudice  to  the  validity  of  the  designation  of  those  notified  bodies  under  Directives  90/385/EEC  and 93/42/EEC and to their capacity to continue issuing valid certificates under  those two Directives until the date of application of this Regulation.
- (96) In  order  to  ensure  a  smooth  transition  to  the  new  rules  for  registration  of  devices  and  of  certificates,  the obligation  to  submit  the  relevant  information  to  the  electronic  systems  set  up  at  Union  level  pursuant  to  this Regulation should,  in  the  event  that  the  corresponding  IT systems  are  developed  according  to  plan,  only  become fully  effective  from  18  months  after  the  date  of  application  of  this  Regulation.  During  this  transitional  period, certain  provisions  of  Directives  90/385/EEC  and  93/42/EEC  should  remain  in  force.  However,  in  order  to  avoid multiple  registrations,  economic  operators  and  notified  bodies  who  register  in  the  relevant  electronic  systems  set up  at  Union  level  pursuant  to  this  Regulation  should  be  considered  to  be  in  compliance  with  the  registration requirements adopted by the Member States pursuant to those provisions.
- (97) In  order  to provide  for  a  smooth  introduction of  the  UDI system, the moment of application of  the obligation to place the UDI carrier on the label of the device should vary from one to five years after  the date of application of this Regulation depending upon the class of the device concerned.
- (98) Directives  90/385/EEC  and  93/42/EEC  should  be  repealed  to  ensure  that  only  one  set  of  rules  applies  to  the placing  of  medical  devices  on  the  market  and  the  related  aspects  covered  by  this  Regulation.  Manufacturers' obligations  as  regards  the  making  available  of  documentation  regarding  devices  they  placed  on  the  market  and manufacturers'  and  Member  States'  obligations  as  regards  vigilance  activities  for  devices  placed  on  the  market pursuant  to  those  Directives  should  however  continue  to  apply.  While  it  should  be  left  to  Member  States  to decide  how  to  organise  vigilance  activities,  it  is  desirable  for  them  to  have  the  possibility  of  reporting  incidents related  to  devices  placed  on  the  market  pursuant  to the  Directives  using  the  same  tools  as  those  for  reporting  on devices  placed  on  the  market  pursuant  to  this  Regulation.  It  is  furthermore  appropriate,  in  order  to  ensure a smooth transition from the old regime to the new regime, to provide that Commission Regulation  (EU)  No  207/2012  ( 1 )  and  Commission  Regulation  (EU)  No  722/2012  ( 2 )  should  remain  in  force  and continue  to  apply  unless  and  until  repealed  by  implementing  acts  adopted  by  the  Commission  pursuant  to  this Regulation.
( 1 ) Commission Regulation (EU) No 207/2012 of 9 March 2012 on electronic instructions for use of medical devices (OJ L 72, , p. 28).
( 2 ) Commission Regulation (EU) No 722/2012 of 8 August 2012 concerning particular requirements as regards the requirements laid down in Council Directives 90/385/EEC and 93/42/EEC with respect to active implantable medical devices and medical devices manufactured utilising tissues of animal origin (OJ L 212, , p. 3). Decision  2010/227/EU  adopted  in  implementation  of  those  Directives  and  Directive  98/79/EC  should  also remain  in  force  and  continue  to  apply  until  the  date  when  Eudamed  becomes  fully  functional.  Conversely,  no such  maintenance  in  force  is  required  for  Commission  Directives  2003/12/EC ( 1 )  and  2005/50/EC ( 2 )  and Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 920/2013 ( 3 ).
- (99) The  requirements  of  this  Regulation  should  be  applicable  to  all  devices  placed  on  the  market  or  put  into  service from the date of application of this Regulation. However, in order  to provide for a smooth transition it should be possible, for a limited period of time from that date, for devices to be placed on the market or put into service by virtue of a valid certificate issued pursuant to Directive 90/385/EEC or pursuant to Directive 93/42/EEC.
- (100) The European Data Protection Supervisor has given an opinion ( 4 ) pursuant to Article 28(2) of Reg­ ulation (EC) No 45/2001.
- (101)   Since  the  objectives  of  this  Regulation,  namely  to  ensure  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  internal  market  as regards  medical  devices  and  to  ensure  high  standards  of  quality  and  safety  for  medical  devices,  thus  ensuring a high level of protection of health and safety of patients, users and other persons, cannot be sufficiently achieved by  the  Member  States  but  can  rather,  by  reason  of  its  scale  and  effects,  be  better  achieved  at  Union  level,  the Union  may  adopt  measures,  in  accordance  with  the  principle  of  subsidiarity  as  set  out  in  Article  5  of  the  Treaty on European Union. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve those objectives,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
## CHAPTER I
## SCOPE AND DEFINITIONS
## Article 1
## Subject matter and scope
- 1. This  Regulation  lays  down  rules  concerning  the  placing  on  the  market,  making  available  on  the  market or  putting into service of medical devices for human use and accessories for such devices in the Union. This Regulation also applies to clinical investigations concerning such medical devices and accessories conducted in the Union.
- 2. This  Regulation  shall  also  apply,  as  from  the  date  of  application  of  common  specifications  adopted  pursuant  to Article  9,  to  the  groups  of  products  without  an  intended  medical  purpose  that  are  listed  in  Annex  XVI,  taking  into account  the  state  of  the  art,  and  in  particular  existing  harmonised  standards  for  analogous  devices  with  a  medical purpose,  based  on  similar technology.  The  common  specifications  for  each  of the  groups  of  products  listed in Annex  XVI  shall  address,  at  least,  application  of  risk  management  as  set  out  in  Annex  I  for  the  group  of  products  in question and, where necessary, clinical evaluation regarding safety.
The necessary common specifications shall  be  adopted  by 26  May  2020.  They shall  apply  as  from  six  months  after  the date of  their entry into force or from 26 May 2020, whichever is the latest.
Notwithstanding Article 122, Member  States' measures regarding the qualification of the products covered by Annex  XVI  as  medical  devices  pursuant  to  Directive  93/42/EEC  shall  remain  valid  until  the  date  of  application,  as referred to in the first subparagraph, of the relevant common specifications for  that group of products.
This  Regulation  also  applies  to clinical  investigations  conducted  in  the  Union  concerning  the  products  referred  to in  the first  subparagraph.
- 3. Devices  with  both  a  medical  and  a  non-medical  intended  purpose  shall  fulfil  cumulatively  the  requirements applicable  to  devices  with  an  intended  medical  purpose  and  those  applicable  to  devices  without  an  intended  medical purpose.
( 1 ) Commission Directive 2003/12/EC of 3 February 2003 on the reclassification of breast implants in the framework of Directive 93/42/EEC concerning medical devices (OJ L 28, , p. 43).
( 2 ) Commission  Directive  2005/50/EC  of  11  August  2005  on  the  reclassification  of  hip,  knee  and  shoulder  joint  replacements  in  the framework of Council Directive 93/42/EEC concerning medical devices (OJ L 210, , p. 41).
- ( 3 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 920/2013 of 24 September 2013 on the designation and the supervision of notified bodies under Council Directive 90/385/EEC on active implantable medical devices and Council Directive 93/42/EEC on medical devices (OJ L 253, , p. 8).
( 4 ) OJ C 358, , p. 10. - 4. 