- 4. Notwithstanding  paragraph  3,  in  the  event  of  a  serious  public  health  threat  the  report  referred  to  in  paragraph  1 shall be provided immediately, and not later than 2 days after the manufacturer becomes aware of that threat.
- 5. Notwithstanding paragraph 3, in the event of death or an unanticipated serious deterioration in a person's state of health  the  report  shall  be  provided  immediately  after  the  manufacturer  has  established  or  as  soon  as  it  suspects  a  causal relationship  between  the  device  and  the  serious  incident  but  not  later  than  10  days  after  the  date  on  which  the manufacturer becomes aware of the serious incident.
- 6. Where  necessary  to  ensure  timely  reporting,  the  manufacturer  may  submit  an  initial  report  that  is  incomplete followed up by a complete report.
- 7. If,  after  becoming  aware  of  a  potentially  reportable  incident,  the  manufacturer  is  uncertain  about  whether  the incident is reportable, it shall nevertheless submit a report within the timeframe required in accordance with paragraphs 2 to 5.
- 8. Except in cases of urgency in which the manufacturer needs to undertake field safety corrective action immediately, the  manufacturer  shall,  without  undue  delay,  report  the  field  safety  corrective  action  referred  to  in  point  (b)  of paragraph 1 in advance of the field safety corrective action being undertaken.
- 9. For similar serious incidents that occur  with the same device or device type and for  which the root cause has been identified  or  a  field  safety corrective  action  implemented  or  where  the  incidents  are  common  and  well  documented,  the manufacturer  may  provide  periodic  summary  reports  instead  of  individual  serious  incident  reports,  on  condition  that the  coordinating  competent  authority  referred  to  in  Article  89(9),  in  consultation  with  the  competent  authorities referred  to  in  point  (a)  of  Article  92(8),  has  agreed  with  the  manufacturer  on  the  format,  content  and  frequency  of  the periodic summary reporting. Where a single competent authority is referred to in points (a) and (b) of Article 92(8), the manufacturer may provide periodic summary reports following agreement with that competent authority.
- 10. The  Member  States  shall  take  appropriate  measures  such  as  organising  targeted  information  campaigns,  to encourage  and  enable  healthcare  professionals,  users  and  patients  to  report  to  the  competent  authorities  suspected serious incidents referred to in point (a) of paragraph 1.
The  competent  authorities  shall  record  centrally  at  national  level  reports  they  receive  from  healthcare  professionals, users and patients. - 11. Where  a  competent  authority  of  a  Member  State  obtains  such  reports  on  suspected  serious  incidents  referred  to in  point  (a)  of  paragraph  1  from  healthcare  professionals,  users  or  patients,  it  shall  take  the  necessary  steps  to  ensure that the manufacturer of the device concerned is informed of the suspected serious incident without delay.
Where  the  manufacturer  of  the  device  concerned  considers  that  the  incident  is  a  serious  incident,  it  shall  provide a  report  in  accordance  with  paragraphs  1  to 5  of  this  Article  on  that  serious  incident  to  the  competent  authority of  the Member State in which that serious incident occurred and shall take the appropriate follow-up action in accordance with Article 89.
Where the  manufacturer  of  the  device  concerned  considers  that  the  incident  is  not  a  serious  incident  or  is  an  expected undesirable  side-effect,  which  will  be  covered  by  trend  reporting  in  accordance  with  Article  88,  it  shall  provide  an explanatory  statement.  If  the  competent  authority  does  not  agree  with  the  conclusion  of  the  explanatory  statement,  it may require the manufacturer  to provide a report in  accordance with paragraphs 1 to 5 of  this  Article  and  require  it  to ensure that appropriate follow-up action is taken in accordance with Article 89.
## Article 88
## Trend reporting
- 1. Manufacturers  shall  report,  by  means  of  the  electronic  system  referred  to  in  Article  92,  any  statistically  significant increase  in  the  frequency  or  severity  of  incidents  that  are  not  serious  incidents  or  that  are  expected  undesirable  sideeffects  that  could  have  a  significant  impact  on  the  benefit-risk  analysis  referred  to  in  Sections  1  and  5  of  Annex  I  and which  have  led  or  may  lead  to  risks  to  the  health  or  safety  of  patients,  users  or  other  persons  that  are  unacceptable when  weighed  against  the  intended  benefits. The  significant increase shall be established in  comparison  to  the foreseeable  frequency or  severity  of  such  incidents  in  respect  of  the  device,  or  category  or  group  of  devices,  in  question during a specific period as specified in the technical documentation and product information.
The  manufacturer  shall  specify  how  to  manage  the  incidents  referred  to  in  the  first  subparagraph  and  the  methodology used  for  determining  any  statistically  significant  increase  in  the  frequency  or  severity  of  such  incidents,  as  well  as  the observation period, in the post-market surveillance plan referred to in Article 84.
- 2. The competent authorities may conduct their own assessments on the trend reports referred to in paragraph 1 and require  the  manufacturer  to  adopt  appropriate  measures  in  accordance  with  this  Regulation  in  order  to  ensure  the protection  of  public  health  and  patient  safety.  Each  competent  authority  shall  inform  the  Commission,  the  other competent  authorities  and  the  notified  body  that  issued  the  certificate,  of  the  results  of  such  assessment  and  of  the adoption of such measures.
## Article 89
## Analysis of serious incidents and field safety corrective actions
- 1. Following  the  reporting  of  a  serious  incident  pursuant  to  Article  87(1),  the  manufacturer  shall,  without  delay, perform  the  necessary  investigations  in  relation  to  the  serious  incident  and  the  devices  concerned.  This  shall  include a  risk  assessment  of  the  incident  and  field  safety  corrective  action  taking  into  account  criteria  as  referred  to  in paragraph 3 of this Article as appropriate.
The manufacturer  shall  co-operate  with  the  competent  authorities  and  where  relevant  with  the  notified  body concerned during  the  investigations  referred  to  in  the  first  subparagraph  and  shall  not  perform  any  investigation  which  involves altering  the  device  or  a  sample  of  the  batch  concerned  in  a  way  which  may  affect  any  subsequent  evaluation  of  the causes of the incident, prior  to informing the competent authorities of such action.
- 2. Member  States  shall  take  the  necessary  steps  to  ensure  that  any  information  regarding  a  serious  incident  that  has occurred  within  their  territory,  or  a  field  safety  corrective  action  that  has  been  or  is  to  be  undertaken  within  their territory,  and  that  is  brought  to  their  knowledge  in  accordance  with  Article  87  is  evaluated centrally  at  national  level  by their competent authority, if possible together  with the manufacturer, and, where relevant, the notified body concerned. - 3. In  the  context  of  the  evaluation  referred  to  in paragraph  2,  the  competent  authority  shall  evaluate the  risks  arising from  the  reported  serious  incident  and  evaluate  any  related  field  safety  corrective  actions,  taking  into  account  the protection  of  public  health  and  criteria  such  as  causality,  detectability  and  probability  of  recurrence  of  the  problem, frequency of use of the device, probability of occurrence of direct or indirect harm, the severity of  that harm, the clinical benefit  of  the  device,  intended  and  potential  users,  and  population  affected.  The  competent  authority  shall  also  evaluate the  adequacy  of  the  field  safety  corrective  action  envisaged  or  undertaken  by  the  manufacturer  and  the  need  for,  and kind  of,  any  other  corrective  action,  in  particular  taking  into  account  the  principle  of  inherent  safety  contained  in Annex I.
Upon  request  by  the  national  competent  authority,  manufacturers  shall  provide  all  documents  necessary  for  the  risk assessment.
- 4. The  competent  authority  shall  monitor  the  manufacturer's  investigation  of  a  serious  incident.  Where  necessary, a competent authority may intervene in a manufacturer's investigation or initiate an independent investigation.
- 5. The  manufacturer  shall  provide  a  final  report  to  the  competent  authority  setting  out  its  findings  from  the  investi­ gation  by  means  of  the  electronic  system  referred  to  in  Article  92.  The  report  shall  set  out  conclusions  and  where relevant indicate corrective actions to be taken.
- 6. In  the  case  of  devices  referred  to  in  the  first  subparagraph  of  Article  1(8)  and  where  the  serious  incident  or  field safety  corrective  action  may  be  related  to  a  substance  which,  if  used  separately,  would  be  considered  to  be  a  medicinal product,  the  evaluating  competent  authority or  the  coordinating  competent  authority  referred  to  in  paragraph  9  of  this Article  shall,  inform  the  national  competent  authority or  the  EMA,  depending  on which issued  the  scientific  opinion  on that substance under Article 52(9), of that serious incident or field safety corrective action.
In  the  case  of  devices  covered  by  this  Regulation  in  accordance  with  point  (g)  of  Article  1(6)  and  where  the  serious incident  or  field  safety  corrective  action  may  be  related  to  the  derivatives  of  tissues  or  cells  of  human  origin  utilised for  the  manufacture  of  the  device,  and  in  the  case  of  devices  falling  under  this  Regulation  pursuant  to  Article  1(10), the  competent  authority or  the  coordinating  competent  authority  referred  to in  paragraph  9  of  this  Article  shall  inform the  competent  authority  for  human  tissues  and  cells  that  was  consulted  by  the  notified  body  in  accordance  with Article 52(10).
- 7. After  carrying  out  the  evaluation  in  accordance  with  paragraph  3  of  this  Article,  the  evaluating  competent authority  shall,  through  the  electronic  system  referred  to  in  Article  92,  inform,  without  delay,  the  other  competent authorities  of  the  corrective  action  taken  or  envisaged  by  the  manufacturer  or  required  of  it  to  minimise  the  risk  of recurrence of the serious incident, including information on the underlying events and the outcome of its assessment.
- 8. The  manufacturer  shall  ensure  that  information  about  the  field  safety  corrective  action  taken  is  brought  without delay to the attention  of users  of  the  device  in  question  by means  of a  field  safety  notice.  The  field  safety  notice  shall  be edited  in  an  official  Union  language  or  languages  determined  by  the  Member  State  in  which  the  field  safety  corrective action  is  taken.  Except  in  cases  of  urgency,  the  content  of  the  draft  field  safety  notice  shall  be  submitted  to  the evaluating  competent  authority  or,  in  the  cases  referred  to  in  paragraph  9,  to  the  coordinating  competent  authority  to allow it to make comments. Unless duly justified by the situation of the individual Member State, the content of the field safety notice shall be consistent in all Member States.
The  field  safety  notice  shall  allow  the  correct  identification  of  the  device  or  devices  involved,  in  particular  by  including the relevant UDIs, and  the correct identification, in particular, by including the SRN,  if already issued, of the manufacturer  that  has  undertaken  the  field  safety  corrective  action.  The  field  safety  notice  shall  explain,  in  a  clear manner,  without  understating  the  level  of  risk,  the  reasons  for  the  field  safety  corrective  action  with  reference  to  the device  malfunction  and  associated  risks  for  patients,  users  or  other  persons,  and  shall  clearly  indicate  all  the  actions  to be taken by users.
The manufacturer shall enter  the field safety notice in the electronic system referred to in Article 92 through which that notice shall be accessible to the public.
- 9. The competent authorities shall actively participate in a procedure in order  to coordinate their assessments referred to in paragraph 3 in the following cases:
- (a)   where  there  is  concern  regarding  a  particular  serious  incident  or  cluster  of  serious  incidents  relating  to  the  same device or  type of device of  the same manufacturer in more than one Member State; - (b)   where  the  appropriateness  of  a  field  safety  corrective  action  that  is  proposed  by  a  manufacturer  in  more  than  one Member State is in question.
That coordinated procedure shall cover the following:
- -  designation of a coordinating competent authority on a case by case basis, when required;
- -  defining  the  coordinated  assessment  process,  including  the  tasks  and  responsibilities  of  the  coordinating  competent authority and the involvement of other competent authorities.
Unless otherwise agreed between  the competent  authorities, the coordinating competent  authority shall be the competent authority of the Member State in which the manufacturer has its registered place of business.
The  coordinating  competent  authority  shall,  through  the  electronic  system  referred  to  in  Article  92,  inform  the manufacturer,  the  other  competent  authorities  and  the  Commission  that  it  has  assumed  the  role  of  coordinating authority.
- 10. The  designation  of  a  coordinating  competent  authority  shall  not  affect  the  rights  of  the  other  competent authorities  to  perform  their  own  assessment  and  to  adopt  measures  in  accordance  with  this  Regulation  in  order  to ensure  the  protection  of  public  health  and  patient  safety.  