- . The application shall describe the design, manufacture and performance of  the device in question. It shall include the technical documentation as referred to in Annexes II and III.
- . The  notified  body  shall  examine  the  application  by  using  staff,  employed  by  it,  with  proven  knowledge  and experience  regarding  the  technology  concerned  and  its  clinical  application.  The  notified  body  may  require  the application  to  be  completed  by  having  further  tests  carried  out  or  requesting  further  evidence  to  be  provided  to allow  assessment  of  conformity  with  the  relevant  requirements  of  the  Regulation.  The  notified  body  shall  carry out  adequate  physical  or  laboratory  tests  in  relation  to  the  device  or  request  the  manufacturer  to  carry  out  such tests.
- . The  notified  body  shall  review  the  clinical  evidence  presented  by  the  manufacturer  in  the  clinical  evaluation report  and  the  related  clinical  evaluation  that  was  conducted.  The  notified  body  shall  employ  device  reviewers with  sufficient  clinical  expertise  and,  if  necessary,  use  external  clinical  experts  with  direct  and  current  experience relating to the device in question or  the clinical condition in which it is utilised, for  the purposes of that review. - . The  notified  body  shall,  in  circumstances  in  which  the  clinical  evidence  is  based  partly  or  totally  on  data  from devices  which  are  claimed  to  be  equivalent  to  the  device  under  assessment,  assess  the  suitability  of  using  such data,  taking  into  account  factors  such  as  new  indications  and  innovation.  The  notified  body  shall  clearly document  its  conclusions  on  the  claimed  equivalence,  and  on  the  relevance  and  adequacy  of  the  data  for demonstrating  conformity.  For  any characteristic  of  the  device  claimed  as  innovative  by  the  manufacturer  or  for new indications, the notified body shall assess to what extent specific claims are supported by specific pre-clinical and clinical data and risk analysis.
- . The  notified  body  shall  verify  that  the  clinical  evidence  and  the  clinical  evaluation  are  adequate  and  shall  verify the  conclusions  drawn  by  the  manufacturer  on  the  conformity  with  the  relevant  general  safety  and  performance requirements.  That  verification  shall  include  consideration  of  the  adequacy  of  the  benefit-risk  determination,  the risk  management,  the  instructions  for  use,  the  user  training  and  the  manufacturer's  post-market  surveillance plan, and include a review of the need for, and the adequacy of, the PMCF plan proposed, where applicable.
- . Based  on  its  assessment  of  the  clinical  evidence,  the  notified  body  shall  consider  the  clinical  evaluation  and  the benefit-risk  determination,  and  whether  specific  milestones  need  to  be  defined  to  allow  the  notified  body  to review updates to the clinical evidence that result from post-market surveillance and PMCF data.
- . The  notified  body  shall  clearly  document  the  outcome  of  its  assessment  in  the  clinical  evaluation  assessment report.
- . The  notified  body  shall  provide  the  manufacturer  with  a  report  on  the  technical  documentation  assessment, including  a  clinical  evaluation  assessment  report.  If  the  device  conforms  to  the  relevant  provisions  of  this Regulation,  the  notified  body  shall  issue  an  EU  technical  documentation  assessment  certificate.  The  certificate shall  contain  the  conclusions  of  the  technical  documentation  assessment,  the  conditions  of  the  certificate's validity,  the  data  needed  for  identification  of  the  approved  design,  and,  where  appropriate,  a  description  of  the intended purpose of the device.
- . Changes  to  the  approved  device  shall  require  approval  from  the  notified  body  which  issued  the  EU  technical documentation  assessment  certificate  where  such  changes  could  affect  the  safety  and  performance  of  the  device or  the  conditions  prescribed  for  use  of  the  device.  Where  the  manufacturer  plans  to  introduce  any of  the  abovementioned  changes  it  shall  inform  the  notified  body  which  issued  the  EU  technical  documentation  assessment certificate  thereof.  The  notified  body  shall  assess  the  planned  changes  and  decide  whether  the  planned  changes require  a  new  conformity  assessment  in  accordance  with  Article  52  or  whether  they  could  be  addressed  by means  of  a  supplement  to  the  EU  technical  documentation  assessment  certificate.  In  the  latter  case,  the  notified body  shall  assess  the  changes,  notify  the  manufacturer  of  its  decision  and,  where  the  changes  are  approved, provide it with a supplement to the EU technical documentation assessment certificate.
## 5. Specific additional procedures
- . Assessment procedure for certain class III and class IIb devices
- (a)   For  class  III  implantable  devices,  and  for  class  IIb  active  devices  intended  to  administer  and/or  remove a  medicinal  product  as  referred  to  in  Section  .  of  Annex  VIII  (Rule  12),  the  notified  body  shall,  having verified the quality of clinical data supporting the clinical evaluation report of the manufacturer referred to in Article  61(12),  prepare  a  clinical  evaluation  assessment  report  which  sets  out  its  conclusions  concerning  the clinical  evidence  provided  by  the  manufacturer,  in  particular  concerning  the  benefit-risk  determination,  the consistency  of  that  evidence  with  the  intended  purpose,  including  the  medical  indication  or  indications  and the PMCF plan referred to in Article 10(3) and Part B of Annex XIV.
The  notified  body  shall  transmit  its  clinical  evaluation  assessment  report,  along  with  the  manufacturer's clinical  evaluation  documentation,  referred  to  in  points  (c)  and  (d)  of  Section    of  Annex  II,  to  the Commission.
The  Commission  shall  immediately  transmit  those  documents  to  the  relevant  expert  panel  referred  to  in Article 106.
- (b)   The  notified  body  may  be  requested  to  present  its  conclusions  as  referred  to  in  point  (a)  to  the  expert  panel concerned.
- (c)   The  expert  panel  shall  decide,  under  the  supervision  of  the  Commission,  on  the  basis  of  all  of  the  following criteria:
- (i) the  novelty of  the  device  or  of  the  related  clinical  procedure  involved,  and  the  possible  major  clinical  or health impact thereof;
- (ii) a  significantly  adverse  change in  the  benefit-risk  profile  of a  specific  category or  group  of  devices  due  to scientifically  valid  health  concerns  in  respect  of  components  or  source  material  or  in  respect  of  the impact on health in the case of failure of the device;
- (iii)   a  significantly  increased  rate  of  serious  incidents  reported  in  accordance  with  Article  87  in  respect  of a specific category or group of devices,
whether  to  provide  a  scientific  opinion  on  the  clinical  evaluation  assessment  report  of  the  notified  body based  on  the  clinical  evidence  provided  by  the  manufacturer,  in  particular  concerning  the  benefit-risk  deter­ mination,  the  consistency  of  that  evidence  with  the  medical  indication  or  indications  and  the  PMCF  plan. That  scientific  opinion  shall  be  provided  within  a  period  of  60  days,  starting  on  the  day  of  receipt  of  the documents  from  the  Commission  as  referred  to  in  point  (a).  The  reasons  for  the  decision  to  provide a  scientific  opinion  on  the  basis  of  the  criteria  in  points  (i),  (ii)  and  (iii)  shall  be  included  in  the  scientific opinion.  Where  the  information  submitted  is  not  sufficient  for  the  expert  panel  to  reach  a  conclusion,  this shall be stated in the scientific opinion.
- (d)   The  expert  panel  may  decide,  under  the  supervision  of  the  Commission,  on  the  basis  of  the  criteria  laid down in point (c) not to provide a scientific  opinion,  in which  case  it  shall  inform  the  notified  body  as  soon as  possible  and  in  any  event  within  21  days  of  receipt  of  the  documents  as  referred  to  in  point  (a)  from  the Commission.  The  expert  panel  shall  within  that  time  limit  provide  the  notified  body  and  the  Commission with  the  reasons  for  its  decision,  whereupon  the  notified  body  may  proceed  with  the  certification  procedure of  that device.
- (e)   The  expert  panel  shall  within  21  days  of  receipt  of  the  documents  from  the  Commission  notify  the Commission,  through  Eudamed  whether  it  intends  to  provide  a  scientific  opinion,  pursuant  to  point  (c),  or whether it intends not to provide a scientific opinion, pursuant to point (d).
- (f)   Where  no  opinion  has  been  delivered  within  a  period  of  60  days,  the  notified  body  may  proceed  with  the certification procedure of the device in question.
- (g)   The  notified  body  shall  give  due  consideration  to  the  views  expressed  in  the  scientific  opinion  of  the  expert panel.  Where the  expert  panel  finds  that  the  level  of  clinical  evidence  is  not  sufficient  or  otherwise  gives  rise to  serious  concerns  about  the  benefit-risk  determination,  the  consistency  of  that  evidence  with  the  intended purpose,  including  the  medical  indication(s),  and  with  the  PMCF  plan,  the  notified  body  shall,  if  necessary, advise the manufacturer to restrict the intended purpose of the device to certain groups of patients or certain medical  indications  and/or  to  impose  a  limit  on  the  duration  of  validity  of  the  certificate,  to  undertake specific  PMCF  studies,  to  adapt  the  instructions  for  use  or  the  summary  of  safety  and  performance,  or  to impose other restrictions in its conformity assessment report, as appropriate. The notified body shall provide a  full  justification  where  it  has  not  followed  the  advice  of  the  expert  panel  in  its  conformity  assessment report  and  the  Commission  shall  without  prejudice  to  Article  109  make  both  the  scientific  opinion  of  the expert panel and the written justification provided by the notified body publicly available via Eudamed.
- (h)   The  Commission,  after  consultation  with  the  Member  States  and  relevant  scientific  experts  shall  provide guidance for expert panels for consistent interpretation of the criteria in point (c) before 26 May 2020.
- . Procedure in the case of devices incorporating a medicinal substance
- (a)   Where  a  device  incorporates,  as  an  integral  part,  a  substance  which,  if  used  separately,  may  be  considered  to be  a  medicinal  product  within  the  meaning  of  point  2  of  Article  1  of  Directive  2001/83/EC,  including a  medicinal  product  derived  from  human  blood  or  human plasma  and  that has  an  action  ancillary  to that of the  device,  the  quality,  safety  and  usefulness  of  the  substance  shall  be  verified  by  analogy  with  the  methods specified in Annex I to Directive 2001/83/EC.
- (b)   Before  issuing  an  EU  technical  documentation  assessment  certificate,  the  notified  body  shall,  having  verified the  usefulness  of  the  substance  as  part  of  the  device  and  taking  account  of  the  intended  purpose  of  the device,  seek  a  scientific  opinion  from  one  of  the  competent  authorities  designated  by  the  Member  States  in accordance with Directive  2001/83/EC  or  from  the  EMA,  either  of  which  to  be  referred  to  in  this  Section  as 'the  medicinal products authority consulted' depending on which has been consulted under  this point, on the quality and safety of the substance including the benefit or risk of the incorporation of the substance into the device.  Where  the  device  incorporates  a  human  blood  or  plasma  derivative  or  a  substance  that,  if  used separately,  may  be  considered  to  be  a  medicinal  product  falling  exclusively  within  the  scope  of  the  Annex  to Regulation (EC) No 726/2004, the notified body shall seek the opinion of the EMA.
- (c) When issuing its opinion, the medicinal products authority consulted shall take into account the manufactur­ ing  process  and  the  data  relating  to  the  usefulness  of  incorporation  of  the  substance  into  the  device  as determined by the notified body.
- (d)   The  medicinal  products authority consulted shall provide its opinion to the notified body within 210 days of receipt of all the necessary documentation.
- (e)   The  scientific  opinion  of  the  medicinal  products  authority  consulted,  and  any  possible  update  of  that opinion,  shall  be  included  in  the  documentation  of  the  notified  body  concerning  the  device.  The  notified body  shall  give  due  consideration  to  the  views  expressed  in  the  scientific  opinion  when  making  its  decision. The notified body shall not deliver  the certificate if  the scientific  opinion is unfavourable and shall convey its final  decision to the medicinal products authority consulted.
- (f)   Before  any  change  is  made  with  respect  to  an  ancillary  substance  incorporated  in  a  device,  in  particular related  to  its  manufacturing  process,  the  manufacturer  shall  inform  the  notified  body  of  the  changes.  That notified  body  shall  seek  the  opinion  of  the  medicinal  products  authority  consulted,  in  order  to  confirm  that the  quality  and  safety  of  the  ancillary  substance  remain  unchanged.  The  medicinal  products  authority consulted  shall  take  into  account  the  data  relating  to  the  usefulness  of  incorporation  of  the  substance  into the  device  as  determined  by  the  notified  body,  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  changes  have  no  negative  impact on  the  risk  or  benefit  previously  established  concerning  the  incorporation  of  the  substance  into  the  device. The  medicinal  products  authority  consulted  shall  provide  its  opinion  within  60  days  after  receipt  of  all  the necessary  documentation  regarding  the  changes.  The  notified  body  shall  not  deliver  the  supplement  to  the EU  technical documentation  assessment  certificate  if the scientific  opinion  provided  by  the  medicinal products  authority  consulted  is  unfavourable.  The  notified  body  shall  convey  its  final decision  to  the medicinal products authority consulted.
- (g)   Where  the  medicinal  products  authority  consulted  obtains  information  on  the  ancillary  substance,  which could  have  an  impact  on  the  risk  or  benefit  previously  established  concerning  the  incorporation  of  the substance  into  the  device,  it  shall  advise  the  notified  body  as  to  whether  this  information  has  an  impact  on the  risk  or  benefit  previously  established  concerning  the  incorporation  of  the  substance  into  the  device.  The notified body shall take that advice into account in reconsidering its assessment of the conformity assessment procedure.
- . Procedure  in  the  case  of  devices  manufactured  utilising,  or  incorporating,  tissues  or  cells  of  human  or  animal origin, or  their derivatives, that are non-viable or  rendered non-viable
- .   Tissues or cells of human origin or  their derivatives
- (a)   For  devices  manufactured  utilising  derivatives  of  tissues  or  cells  of  human  origin  that  are  covered  by  this Regulation  in  accordance  with  point  (g)  of  Article  1(6)  and  for  devices  that  incorporate,  as  an  integral  part, tissues  or  cells  of  human  origin,  or  their  derivatives,  covered  by  Directive  2004/23/EC,  that  have  an  action ancillary  to  that  of  the  device,  the  notified  body  shall,  prior  to  issuing  an  EU  technical  documentation assessment  certificate,  seek  a  scientific  opinion  from  one  of  the  competent  authorities  designated  by  the Member States  in  accordance  with  Directive  2004/23/EC  ('human  tissues  and  cells  competent  authority')  on the  aspects  relating  to  the  donation,  procurement  and  testing  of  tissues  or  cells  of  human  origin  or  their derivatives.  The  notified  body  shall  submit  a  summary  of  the  preliminary  conformity  assessment  which provides,  among  other  things,  information  about  the  non-viability  of  the  human  tissues  or  cells  in  question, their  donation,  procurement  and  testing and  the  risk or  benefit  of  the  incorporation  of  the  tissues  or  cells  of human origin or their derivatives into the device.
- (b)   Within  120  days  of  receipt  of  all  the  necessary  documentation,  the  human  tissues  and  cells  competent authority shall provide to the notified body its opinion.
- (c)   The  scientific  opinion  of  the  human  tissues  and  cells  competent  authority,  and  any  possible  update,  shall  be included  in  the  documentation  of  the  notified  body  concerning  the  device.  The  notified  body  shall  give  due consideration  to  the  views  expressed  in  the  scientific  opinion  of  the  human  tissues  and  cells  competent authority  when  making  its  decision.  The  notified  body  shall  not  deliver  the  certificate  if  that  scientific opinion is  unfavourable.  It  shall  convey  its  final  decision  to  the  human  tissues  and  cells  competent  authority concerned.
- (d)   Before  any  change  is  made  with  respect  to  non-viable  tissues  or  cells  of  human  origin  or  their  derivatives incorporated  in  a  device,  in  particular  relating  to  their  donation,  testing  or  procurement,  the  manufacturer shall inform the notified body of the intended changes. The notified body shall consult the authority that was involved  in  the  initial  consultation,  in  order  to  confirm  that  the  quality  and  safety  of  the  tissues  or  cells  of human  origin  or  their  derivatives  incorporated  in  the  device  are  maintained.  The  human  tissues  and  cells competent authority concerned shall take into account the data relating to the usefulness of  incorporation of the tissues or cells of human origin or  their derivatives into the device as determined by the notified body, in order  to ensure that the changes have no negative impact on the established benefit-risk ratio of  the addition of  the  tissues  or  cells  of  human  origin  or  their  derivatives  in  the  device.  It  shall  provide  its  opinion  within 60 days of receipt of all the necessary documentation regarding the intended changes. The notified body shall not  deliver  a  supplement  to  the  EU  technical  documentation  assessment  certificate  if  the  scientific  opinion  is unfavourable  and  shall convey  its final decision to the human  tissues  and  cells  competent  authority concerned.
- .   Tissues or cells of animal origin or  their derivatives
In  the  case  of  devices  manufactured  utilising  animal  tissue  which  is  rendered  non-viable  or  utilising  non-viable products  derived  from  animal  tissue,  as  referred  to  in  Regulation  (EU)  No  722/2012,  the  notified  body  shall apply the relevant requirements laid down in that Regulation.
- . Procedure  in  the  case  of  devices  that  are  composed  of  substances  or  of  combinations  of  substances  that  are absorbed by or locally dispersed in the human body
- (a)   The  quality  and  safety of  devices  that  are  composed  of  substances  or  of  combinations  of  substances  that  are intended  to  be  introduced  into  the  human  body  via  a  body  orifice  or  applied  to  the  skin  and  that  are absorbed  by,  or  locally  dispersed  in,  the  human  body,  shall  be  verified  where  applicable  and  only  in  respect of  the  requirements  not  covered  by  this  Regulation,  in  accordance  with  the  relevant  requirements  laid  down in  Annex  I  to  Directive  2001/83/EC  for  the  evaluation  of  absorption,  distribution,  metabolism,  excretion, local  tolerance,  toxicity,  interaction  with  other  devices,  medicinal  products  or  other  substances  and  potential for adverse reactions.
