- 9. The  MDCG  shall  have  the  tasks  laid  down  in  Article  105  of  this  Regulation  and  Article  99  of  Regulation (EU) 2017/746.
## Article 104
## Support by the Commission
The  Commission  shall  support  the  functioning  of  the  cooperation  between  national  competent  authorities.  It  shall,  in particular,  provide  for  the  organisation  of  exchanges  of  experience  between  the  competent  authorities  and  provide technical,  scientific  and  logistic  support  to  the  MDCG  and  its  sub-groups.  It  shall  organise  the  meetings  of  the  MDCG and its sub-groups, participate in those meetings and ensure the appropriate follow-up.
## Article 105
## Tasks of the MDCG
Under this Regulation, the MDCG shall have the following tasks:
- (a)   to  contribute  to  the  assessment  of  applicant  conformity  assessment  bodies  and  notified  bodies  pursuant  to  the provisions set out in Chapter IV;
- (b)   to  advise  the  Commission,  at  its  request,  in  matters  concerning  the  coordination  group  of  notified  bodies  as established pursuant to Article 49;
- (c)   to  contribute  to  the  development  of  guidance  aimed  at  ensuring  effective  and  harmonised  implementation  of  this Regulation,  in  particular  regarding  the  designation  and  monitoring  of  notified  bodies,  application  of  the  general safety  and  performance  requirements  and  conduct  of  clinical  evaluations  and  investigations  by  manufacturers, assessment by notified bodies and vigilance activities;
- (d)   to  contribute  to  the  continuous  monitoring  of  technical  progress  and  assessment  of  whether  the  general  safety  and performance requirements laid down in this Regulation and Regulation (EU) 2017/746 are adequate to ensure safety and performance of devices, and thereby contribute to identifying whether  there is a need to amend Annex I to this Regulation;
- (e)   to  contribute  to  the  development  of  device  standards,  of  CS  and  of  scientific  guidelines,  including  product  specific guidelines, on clinical investigation of certain devices in particular  implantable devices and class III devices;
- (f) to  assist  the  competent  authorities  of  the  Member  States  in  their  coordination  activities  in  particular  in  the  fields  of classification  and  the  determination  of  the  regulatory  status  of  devices,  clinical  investigations,  vigilance  and  market surveillance  including  the  development  and  maintenance  of  a  framework  for  a  European  market  surveillance programme  with  the  objective  of  achieving  efficiency  and  harmonisation  of  market  surveillance  in  the  Union,  in accordance with Article 93;
- (g)   to  provide  advice,  either  on  its  own  initiative  or  at  request of  the  Commission, in  the  assessment of any issue  related to the implementation of this Regulation;
- (h)   to contribute to harmonised administrative practice with regard to devices in the Member States.
## Provision of scientific, technical and clinical opinions and advice
- 1. The  Commission  shall,  by  means  of  implementing  acts  and  in  consultation  with  the  MDCG,  make  provision  for expert  panels  to  be  designated  for  the  assessment  of  the  clinical  evaluation  in  relevant  medical  fields  as  referred  to  in paragraph  9  of  this  Article  and  to  provide  views  in  accordance  with  Article  48(6)  of  Regulation  (EU)  2017/746  on  the performance  evaluation  of  certain in  vitro diagnostic  medical  devices  and,  where  necessary,  for  categories  or  groups  of devices,  or  for  specific  hazards  relating  to  categories  or  groups  of  devices,  observing  the  principles  of  highest  scientific competence,  impartiality,  independence  and  transparency.  The  same  principles  shall  apply  where  the  Commission decides to appoint expert laboratories in accordance with paragraph 7 of this Article.
- 2. Expert  panels  and  expert  laboratories  may  be  designated  in  areas  where  the  Commission,  in  consultation  with  the MDCG,  has  identified  a  need  for  the  provision  of  consistent  scientific,  technical  and/or  clinical  advice  or  laboratory expertise  in  relation  to  the  implementation  of  this  Regulation.  Expert  panels  and  expert  laboratories  may  be  appointed on a standing or temporary basis.
- 3. Expert  panels  shall  consist  of  advisors  appointed  by  the  Commission  on  the  basis  of  up-to-date  clinical,  scientific or  technical  expertise  in  the  field  and  with  a  geographical  distribution  that  reflects  the  diversity  of  scientific  and  clinical approaches  in  the  Union.  The  Commission  shall  determine  the  number  of  members  of  each  panel  in  accordance  with the requisite needs.
The  members  of  expert  panels  shall  perform  their  tasks  with  impartiality  and  objectivity.  They  shall  neither  seek  nor take  instructions  from  notified  bodies  or  manufacturers.  Each  member  shall  draw  up  a  declaration  of  interests,  which shall be made publicly available.
The Commission shall establish systems and procedures to actively manage and prevent potential conflicts of interest.
- 4. Expert  panels  shall  take  into  account  relevant  information  provided  by  stakeholders  including  patients'  organ­ isations and healthcare professionals when preparing their scientific opinions.
- 5. The  Commission,  following  consultation  with  the  MDCG,  may  appoint  advisors  to  expert  panels  following publication  in  the Official  Journal  of  the  European  Union and  on  the  Commission  website  following  a  call  for  expressions of  interest.  Depending  on  the  type  of  task  and  the  need  for  specific  expertise,  advisors  may  be  appointed  to  the  expert panels for a maximum period of three years and their appointment may be renewed.
- 6. The  Commission,  following  consultation  with  the  MDCG,  may  include  advisors  on  a  central  list  of  available experts  who, whilst not being formally appointed to a panel, are available to provide advice and to support the work of the expert panel as needed. That list shall be published on the Commission website.
- 7. The  Commission  may,  by  means  of  implementing  acts  and  following  consultation  with  the  MDCG,  designate expert laboratories, on the basis of their expertise in:
- -  physico-chemical characterisation, or
- -  microbiological, biocompatibility, mechanical, electrical, electronic or non-clinical biological and toxicological testing
of specific devices, categories or groups of devices.
The  Commission  shall  only  designate  expert  laboratories  for  which  a  Member  State  or  the  Joint  Research  Centre  has submitted an application for designation.
- 8. Expert laboratories shall satisfy the following criteria:
- (a)   have  adequate  and  appropriately  qualified  staff  with  adequate  knowledge  and  experience  in  the  field  of  the  devices for  which they are designated;
- (b)   possess the necessary equipment to carry out the tasks assigned to them;
- (c)   have the necessary knowledge of international standards and best practices;
- (d)   have an appropriate administrative organisation and structure;
- (e)   ensure that their staff observe the confidentiality of information and data obtained in carrying out their  tasks.
- 9. Expert  panels  appointed  for  clinical  evaluation  in  relevant  medical  fields  shall  fulfil  the  tasks  provided  for  in Article 54(1) and Article 61(2) and Section  of Annex IX or Section 6 of Annex X, as applicable.
- 10. Expert panels and expert laboratories may have the following tasks, depending on the requisite needs:
- (a) to provide scientific,  technical and clinical assistance to the Commission and the MDCG in relation to the implemen­ tation of  this Regulation;
- (b)   to contribute to the development and maintenance of appropriate guidance and CS for:
- -  clinical investigations,
- -  clinical evaluation and PMCF,
- -  performance studies,
- -  performance evaluation and post-market performance follow-up,
- -  physico-chemical characterisation, and
- -  microbiological, biocompatibility, mechanical, electrical, electronic or non-clinical toxicological testing
for  specific  devices,  or  a  category  or  group  of  devices,  or  for  specific  hazards  related  to  a  category  or  group  of devices;
- (c)   to  develop  and  review  clinical  evaluation  guidance  and  performance  evaluation  guidance  for  performance  of conformity  assessment  in  line  with  the  state  of  the  art  with  regard  to  clinical  evaluation,  performance  evaluation, physico-chemical  characterisation,  and  microbiological,  biocompatibility,  mechanical,  electrical,  electronic  or  nonclinical toxicological testing;
- (d)   to  contribute  to  the  development  of  standards  at  international  level,  ensuring  that  such  standards  reflect  the  state  of the art;
- (e)   to  provide  opinions  in  response  to  consultations  by  manufacturers  in  accordance  with  Article  61(2),  notified  bodies and Member States in accordance with paragraphs 11 to 13 of this Article.
- (f)   to contribute to identification of concerns and emerging issues on the safety and performance of medical devices;
- (g)   to  provide  views  in  accordance  with  Article  48(4)  of  Regulation  (EU)  2017/746  on  the  performance  evaluation  of certain in  vitro diagnostic medical devices.
- 11. The  Commission,  shall  facilitate  the  access  of  Member  States  and  notified  bodies  and  manufacturers  to  advice provided  by  expert  panels  and  expert  laboratories  concerning, inter  alia ,  the  criteria  for  an  appropriate  data  set  for assessment  of  the  conformity  of  a  device,  in  particular  with  regard  to  the  clinical  data  required  for  clinical  evaluation, with  regard  to  physico-chemical  characterisation,  and  with  regard  to  microbiological,  biocompatibility,  mechanical, electrical, electronic and non-clinical toxicological testing.
- 12. When adopting its scientific opinion in accordance with paragraph 9, the members of the expert panels shall use their best endeavours to reach consensus. If consensus cannot be reached, the expert panels shall decide by a majority of their  members,  and  the  scientific  opinion  shall  mention  the  divergent  positions  and  the  grounds  on  which  they  are based.
The  Commission  shall  publish  the  scientific  opinion  and  advice  delivered  in  accordance  with  paragraphs  9  and  11  of this  Article,  ensuring  consideration  of  aspects  of  confidentiality  as  set  out  in  Article  109.  The  clinical  evaluation guidance referred to in point (c) of paragraph 10 shall be published following consultation with the MDCG.
- 13. The  Commission  may  require  manufacturers  and  notified  bodies  to  pay  fees  for  the  advice  provided  by  expert panels  and  expert  laboratories.  The  structure  and  the  level  of  fees  as  well  as  the  scale  and  structure  of  recoverable  costs shall  be  adopted  by  the  Commission  by means  of  implementing  acts,  taking  into account  the  objectives  of  the  adequate implementation of  this  Regulation,  protection  of  health  and  safety,  support  of  innovation  and  cost-effectiveness  and  the necessity  to  achieve  active  participation  in  the  expert  panels.  Those  implementing  acts  shall  be  adopted  in  accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 114(3). - 14. The  fees  payable  to  the  Commission  in  accordance  with  the  procedure  under  paragraph  13  of  this  Article  shall be set in  a  transparent  manner  and on the basis of  the costs  for  the services provided.  The fees  payable shall  be  reduced in  the  case  of  a  clinical  evaluation  consultation  procedure  initiated  in  accordance  with  point  (c)  of  Section    of Annex  IX  involving  a  manufacturer who  is a micro, small or medium-sized  enterprise  within  the  meaning  of Recommendation 2003/361/EC.
- 15. The  Commission  is  empowered  to  adopt  delegated  acts  in  accordance  with  Article  115  to  amend  the  tasks  of expert panels and expert laboratories referred to in paragraph 10 of this Article.
## Article 107
## Conflict of  interests
- 1. Members  of  the  MDCG,  its  sub-groups,  and  members  of  expert  panels  and  expert  laboratories  shall  not  have financial  or  other  interests  in  the  medical  device  industry  which  could  affect  their  impartiality.  They  shall  undertake  to act in the public interest and in an independent manner. They shall declare any direct or indirect interests they may have in  the  medical  device  industry  and  update  that  declaration  whenever  a  relevant  change  occurs.  The  declaration  of interests  shall  be  made  publicly  available  on  the  Commission  website.  This  Article  shall  not  apply  to  the  representatives of stakeholder organisations participating in the sub-groups of the MDCG.
- 2. Experts  and  other  third  parties  invited  by  the  MDCG  on  a  case-by-case  basis  shall  declare  any  interests  they  may have in the issue in question.
## Article 108
## Device registers and databanks
The  Commission  and  the  Member  States  shall  take  all  appropriate  measures  to  encourage  the  establishment  of  registers and databanks for specific  types  of  devices  setting  common  principles  to  collect  comparable  information.  Such registers and databanks shall contribute to the independent evaluation of  the long-term safety and performance of devices, or  the traceability of implantable devices, or all of such characteristics.
## CHAPTER IX
## CONFIDENTIALITY, DATA PROTECTION, FUNDING AND PENALTIES
## Article 109
## Confidentiality
- 1. Unless  otherwise  provided  for  in  this  Regulation  and  without  prejudice  to  existing  national  provisions  and practices  in  the  Member  States  on  confidentiality,  all  parties  involved  in  the  application  of  this  Regulation  shall  respect the confidentiality of information and data obtained in carrying out their  tasks in order  to protect the following:
- (a)   personal data, in accordance with Article 110;
- (b)   commercially  confidential  information  and  trade  secrets  of  a  natural  or  legal  person,  including  intellectual  property rights; unless disclosure is in the public interest;
- (c)   the  effective  implementation of  this Regulation, in particular for  the purpose of inspections, investigations or audits.
- 2. Without  prejudice  to  paragraph  1,  information  exchanged  on  a  confidential  basis  between  competent  authorities and  between  competent  authorities  and  the  Commission  shall  not  be  disclosed  without  the  prior  agreement  of  the originating authority.
- 3. 