For  the  purposes  of  this  Regulation,  medical  devices,  accessories  for  medical  devices,  and  products  listed  in Annex XVI to which this Regulation applies pursuant to paragraph 2 shall hereinafter be referred to as 'devices'.
- 5. Where  justified  on  account  of  the  similarity  between  a  device  with  an  intended  medical  purpose  placed  on  the market and a product without an intended medical purpose in respect of  their characteristics and risks, the Commission is  empowered  to  adopt  delegated  acts  in  accordance  with  Article  115  to  amend  the  list  in  Annex  XVI,  by  adding  new groups of products, in order  to protect the health and safety of users or other persons or other aspects of public health.
- 6. This Regulation does not apply to:
- (a) in vitro diagnostic medical devices covered by Regulation (EU) 2017/746;
- (b)   medicinal  products  as  defined  in  point  2  of  Article  1  of  Directive  2001/83/EC.  In  deciding  whether  a  product  falls under  Directive  2001/83/EC  or  under  this  Regulation,  particular  account  shall  be  taken  of  the  principal  mode  of action of the product;
- (c)   advanced therapy medicinal products covered by Regulation (EC) No 1394/2007;
- (d)   human blood, blood products, plasma or blood cells of human origin or devices which incorporate, when placed on the market or put into service, such blood products, plasma or cells, except for devices referred to in paragraph 8 of this Article;
- (e)   cosmetic products covered by Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009;
- (f)   transplants,  tissues  or  cells  of  animal  origin,  or  their  derivatives,  or  products  containing  or  consisting  of  them; however  this  Regulation  does  apply  to  devices  manufactured  utilising  tissues  or  cells  of  animal  origin,  or  their derivatives, which are non-viable or are rendered non-viable;
- (g)   transplants,  tissues  or  cells  of  human  origin,  or  their  derivatives,  covered  by  Directive  2004/23/EC,  or  products containing  or  consisting  of  them;  however  this  Regulation  does  apply  to  devices  manufactured  utilising  derivatives of  tissues or cells of human origin which are non-viable or are rendered non-viable;
- (h)   products, other  than those referred to in points (d), (f) and (g), that contain or consist of viable biological material or viable  organisms,  including  living  micro-organisms,  bacteria,  fungi  or  viruses  in  order  to  achieve  or  support  the intended purpose of the product;
- (i)   food covered by Regulation (EC) No 178/2002.
- 7. Any  device  which,  when  placed  on  the  market  or  put  into  service,  incorporates  as  an  integral  part  an in  vitro diagnostic  medical  device  as  defined  in  point  2  of  Article  2  of  Regulation  (EU)  2017/746,  shall  be  governed  by  this Regulation.  The  requirements  of  Regulation  (EU)  2017/746  shall  apply  to  the in  vitro diagnostic  medical  device  part  of the device.
- 8. Any  device  which,  when  placed  on  the  market  or  put  into  service,  incorporates,  as  an  integral  part,  a  substance which,  if  used  separately,  would  be  considered  to  be  a  medicinal  product  as  defined  in  point  2  of  Article  1  of Directive  2001/83/EC,  including  a  medicinal  product  derived  from  human  blood  or  human  plasma  as  defined  in point  10  of  Article  1  of  that  Directive,  and  that  has  an  action  ancillary  to  that  of  the  device,  shall  be  assessed  and authorised in accordance with this Regulation.
However, if  the  action  of  that  substance  is  principal  and  not  ancillary  to  that  of  the  device,  the  integral  product  shall  be governed by Directive  2001/83/EC or  Regulation  (EC)  No  726/2004  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  ( 1 ), as  applicable.  In  that  case,  the  relevant  general  safety  and  performance  requirements  set  out  in  Annex  I  to  this Regulation shall apply as far as the safety and performance of the device part are concerned.
- 9. Any  device which  is intended to administer a medicinal product as defined in point 2 of Article 1 of Directive  2001/83/EC  shall  be  governed  by  this  Regulation,  without  prejudice  to  the  provisions  of  that  Directive  and  of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 with regard to the medicinal product.
However,  if  the  device  intended  to  administer  a  medicinal  product  and  the  medicinal  product  are  placed  on  the  market in  such  a  way  that  they  form  a  single  integral  product  which  is  intended  exclusively  for  use  in  the  given  combination and which is not reusable, that single integral product shall be governed by Directive 2001/83/EC or Regulation  (EC)  No  726/2004,  as  applicable.  In  that  case,  the  relevant  general  safety  and  performance  requirements  set out  in  Annex  I  to  this  Regulation  shall  apply  as  far  as  the  safety  and  performance  of  the  device  part  of  the  single integral product are concerned.
( 1 ) Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 March 2004 laying down Community procedures for the authorisation and supervision of medicinal products for human and veterinary use and establishing a European Medicines Agency (OJ L 136, , p. 1). - 10. Any  device  which,  when  placed  on  the  market  or  put  into  service,  incorporates,  as  an  integral  part,  non-viable tissues  or  cells  of  human  origin  or  their  derivatives  that  have  an  action  ancillary  to  that  of  the  device  shall  be  assessed and  authorised  in  accordance  with  this  Regulation.  In  that  case,  the  provisions  for  donation,  procurement  and  testing laid down in Directive 2004/23/EC shall apply.
However, if  the action of  those tissues or cells or  their derivatives is principal and not ancillary to that of  the device and the product is not governed by Regulation (EC) No 1394/2007, the product shall be governed by Directive 2004/23/EC. In  that  case,  the  relevant  general  safety  and  performance  requirements  set  out  in  Annex  I  to  this  Regulation  shall  apply as far as the safety and performance of the device part are concerned.
- 11. This Regulation is specific Union legislation within the meaning of Article 2(3) of Directive 2014/30/EU.
- 12. Devices  that  are  also  machinery  within  the  meaning  of  point  (a)  of  the  second  paragraph  of  Article  2  of Directive  2006/42/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  ( 1 )  shall,  where  a  hazard  relevant  under  that Directive  exists,  also  meet  the  essential  health  and  safety  requirements  set  out  in  Annex  I  to  that  Directive  to  the  extent to  which  those  requirements  are  more  specific  than  the  general  safety  and  performance  requirements  set  out  in Chapter II of Annex I to this Regulation.
