Furthermore, those entities should evaluate their own cybersecurity capabilities and, where appropriate,  pursue  the  integration  of  cybersecurity  enhancing  technologies,  such  as  artificial  intelligence  or machine-learning systems to enhance their capabilities and the security of network and information systems. - (90) To further address key supply chain risks and assist essential and important entities operating in sectors covered by this  Directive  to  appropriately  manage  supply  chain  and  supplier  related  risks,  the  Cooperation  Group,  in cooperation  with  the  Commission  and  ENISA,  and  where  appropriate  after  consulting  relevant  stakeholders including  from  the  industry,  should  carry  out  coordinated  security  risk  assessments  of  critical  supply  chains,  as carried  out  for  5G  networks  following  Commission  Recommendation  (EU)  2019/534 ( 19 ),  with  the  aim  of identifying,  per  sector,  the  critical  ICT services,  ICT systems  or  ICT  products,  relevant  threats  and  vulnerabilities. Such coordinated security risk assessments should identify measures, mitigation plans and best practices to counter critical  dependencies,  potential  single  points  of  failure,  threats,  vulnerabilities  and  other  risks  associated  with  the supply chain and should explore ways to further encourage their wider adoption by essential and important entities. Potential non-technical risk factors, such as undue influence by a third country on suppliers and service providers, in particular  in  the  case  of  alternative  models  of  governance,  include  concealed  vulnerabilities  or  backdoors  and potential systemic supply disruptions, in particular in the case of technological lock-in or provider dependency.
- (91) The coordinated security risk assessments of critical supply chains, in light of the features of the sector concerned, should  take  into  account  both  technical  and,  where  relevant,  non-technical  factors  including  those  defined  in Recommendation (EU) 2019/534, in the EU coordinated risk assessment of the cybersecurity of 5G networks and in the EU Toolbox on 5G cybersecurity agreed by the Cooperation Group. To identify the supply chains that should be subject to a coordinated security risk assessment, the following criteria should be taken into account: (i) the extent to which essential and important entities use and rely on specific critical ICT services, ICT systems or ICT products; (ii)  the  relevance  of  specific  critical  ICT services,  ICT systems  or  ICT  products  for  performing  critical  or  sensitive functions, including the processing of personal data; (iii) the availability of alternative ICT services, ICT systems or ICT products; (iv) the resilience of the overall supply chain of ICT services, ICT systems or ICT products throughout their  lifecycle  against  disruptive  events;  and  (v)  for  emerging  ICT  services,  ICT  systems  or  ICT  products,  their potential  future  significance  for  the  entities'  activities.  Furthermore,  particular  emphasis  should  be  placed  on  ICT services, ICT systems or ICT products that are subject to specific requirements stemming from third countries.
- (92) In  order  to  streamline  the  obligations  imposed  on  providers  of  public  electronic  communications  networks  or  of publicly  available  electronic  communications  services,  and  trust  service  providers,  related  to  the  security  of  their network  and  information  systems,  as  well  as  to  enable  those  entities  and  the  competent  authorities  under Directive  (EU)  2018/1972  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council ( 20 ) and  Regulation  (EU)  No  910/2014 respectively to benefit from the legal framework established by this Directive, including the designation of a CSIRT responsible for  incident handling, the participation of  the competent authorities concerned in the activities of  the Cooperation  Group  and  the  CSIRTs  network,  those  entities  should  fall  within  the  scope  of  this  Directive.  The corresponding provisions laid down in Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 and Directive (EU) 2018/1972 related to the imposition of security and notification requirements on those types of entity should therefore be deleted. The rules on reporting obligations laid down in this Directive should be without prejudice to Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and Directive 2002/58/EC.
- (93) The  cybersecurity  obligations  laid  down  in  this  Directive  should  be  considered  to  be  complementary  to  the requirements  imposed  on  trust  service  providers  under  Regulation  (EU)  No  910/2014.  Trust  service  providers should be required to take all appropriate and proportionate measures to manage the risks posed to their services, including  in  relation  to  customers  and  relying  third  parties,  and  to  report  incidents  under  this  Directive.  Such cybersecurity  and  reporting  obligations  should  also  concern  the  physical  protection  of  the  services  provided.  The requirements for qualified trust service providers laid down in Article 24 of Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 continue to apply.
( 19 ) Commission Recommendation (EU) 2019/534 of 26 March 2019 - Cybersecurity of 5G networks (OJ L 88, , p. 42).
( 20 ) Directive (EU) 2018/1972 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 establishing the European Electronic Communications Code (OJ L 321, , p. 36). - (94) Member States can assign the role of  the competent authorities for  trust services to the supervisory bodies under Regulation  (EU)  No  910/2014  in  order  to  ensure  the  continuation  of  current  practices  and  to  build  on  the knowledge and experience gained in the application of  that Regulation.  In such a case,  the  competent  authorities under this Directive should cooperate closely and in a timely manner with those supervisory bodies by exchanging relevant  information  in  order  to  ensure  effective  supervision  and  compliance  of  trust  service  providers  with  the requirements laid down in this Directive and in Regulation (EU) No 910/2014. Where applicable, the CSIRT or the competent authority under  this Directive should immediately inform the supervisory body under Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 about any notified  significant  cyber  threat  or  incident  affecting  trust  services  as  well  as  about  any infringements by a trust service provider of this Directive. For the purpose of reporting, Member States can, where applicable, use the single entry point established to achieve a common and automatic incident reporting to both the supervisory  body  under  Regulation  (EU)  No  910/2014  and  the  CSIRT  or  the  competent  authority  under  this Directive.
- (95) Where  appropriate  and  in  order  to  avoid  unnecessary  disruption,  existing  national  guidelines  adopted  for  the transposition of the rules related to security measures laid down in Articles 40 and 41 of Directive (EU) 2018/1972 should  be  taken  into  account  in  the  transposition  of  this  Directive,  thereby  building  on  the  knowledge  and  skills already acquired under Directive (EU) 2018/1972 concerning security measures and incident notifications. ENISA can also develop guidance on security requirements and on reporting obligations for providers of public electronic communications networks or of publicly available electronic communications services to facilitate harmonisation and  transition  and  to  minimise  disruption.  Member  States  can  assign  the  role  of  the  competent  authorities  for electronic  communications  to  the  national  regulatory  authorities  under  Directive  (EU)  2018/1972  in  order  to ensure the continuation of current practices and to build on the knowledge and experience gained as a result of the implementation of that Directive.
- (96) Given  the  growing  importance  of  number-independent  interpersonal  communications  services  as  defined  in Directive  (EU)  2018/1972,  it  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  such  services  are  also  subject  to  appropriate  security requirements in view of their specific nature and economic importance. As the attack surface continues to expand, number-independent interpersonal communications services, such as messaging services, are becoming widespread attack vectors. Malicious perpetrators use platforms to communicate and attract victims to open compromised web pages, therefore increasing the likelihood of incidents involving the exploitation of personal data, and, by extension, the security of network and information systems. Providers of number-independent interpersonal communications services should ensure a level of security of network and information systems appropriate to the risks posed. Given that  providers  of  number-independent  interpersonal  communications  services  normally  do  not  exercise  actual control over the transmission of signals over networks, the degree of risks posed to such services can be considered in  some  respects  to  be  lower  than  for  traditional  electronic  communications  services.  The  same  applies  to interpersonal  communications  services  as  defined  in  Directive  (EU)  2018/1972  which  make  use  of  numbers  and which do not exercise actual control over signal transmission.
- (97) The internal market is more reliant on the functioning of the internet than ever. The services of almost all essential and  important  entities  are  dependent  on  services  provided  over  the  internet.  In  order  to  ensure  the  smooth provision  of  services  provided  by  essential  and  important  entities,  it  is  important  that  all  providers  of  public electronic  communications  networks  have  appropriate  cybersecurity  risk-management  measures  in  place  and report  significant  incidents  in  relation  thereto.  Member  States  should  ensure  that  the  security  of  the  public electronic  communications  networks  is  maintained  and  that  their  vital  security  interests  are  protected  from sabotage and espionage. Since international connectivity enhances and accelerates the competitive digitalisation of the Union and its economy, incidents affecting undersea communications cables should be reported to the CSIRT or, where applicable, the competent authority. The national cybersecurity strategy should, where relevant, take into account  the  cybersecurity  of  undersea  communications  cables  and  include  a  mapping  of  potential  cybersecurity risks and mitigation measures to secure the highest level of their protection. - (98) In  order  to  safeguard  the  security of  public  electronic  communications  networks  and publicly  available  electronic communications services, the use of encryption technologies, in particular end-to-end encryption as well as datacentric  security  concepts,  such  as  cartography,  segmentation,  tagging,  access  policy  and  access  management,  and automated access decisions, should be promoted. Where necessary, the use of encryption, in particular end-to-end encryption  should  be  mandatory  for  providers  of  public  electronic  communications  networks  or  of  publicly available  electronic  communications  services  in  accordance  with  the  principles  of  security  and  privacy  by  default and by design for  the purposes of  this  Directive.  The  use  of end-to-end encryption  should be reconciled  with  the Member States' powers to ensure the protection of their essential security interests and public security, and to allow for  the  prevention,  investigation,  detection  and  prosecution  of  criminal  offences  in  accordance  with  Union  law. However, this should not weaken end-to-end encryption, which is a critical technology for the effective protection of data and privacy and the security of communications.
- (99) In  order  to  safeguard  the  security,  and  to  prevent  abuse  and  manipulation,  of  public  electronic  communications networks and of publicly available electronic communications services, the use of secure routing standards should be  promoted  to  ensure  the  integrity  and  robustness  of  routing  functions  across  the  ecosystem  of  internet  access service providers.
- (100) In order to safeguard the functionality and integrity of the internet and to promote the security and resilience of the DNS,  relevant  stakeholders  including  Union  private-sector  entities,  providers  of  publicly  available  electronic communications  services,  in  particular  internet  access  service  providers,  and  providers  of  online  search  engines should  be  encouraged  to  adopt  a  DNS  resolution  diversification  strategy.  Furthermore,  Member  States  should encourage the development and use of a public and secure European DNS resolver service.
- (101) This  Directive  lays  down  a  multiple-stage  approach to  the  reporting  of  significant  incidents  in  order  to  strike  the right  balance  between,  on  the  one  hand,  swift  reporting  that  helps  mitigate  the  potential  spread  of  significant incidents and allows essential and important entities to seek assistance, and, on the other, in-depth reporting that draws valuable lessons from individual incidents and improves over time the cyber resilience of individual entities and entire  sectors.  In  that  regard,  this  Directive  should  include  the  reporting  of  incidents  that,  based  on  an  initial assessment  carried  out  by  the  entity  concerned,  could  cause  severe  operational  disruption  of  the  services  or financial loss for that entity or affect other natural or legal persons by causing considerable material or non-material damage. Such initial assessment should take into account, inter alia, the affected network and information systems, in particular their importance in the provision of the entity's services, the severity and technical characteristics of a cyber threat and any underlying vulnerabilities that are being exploited as well as the entity's experience with similar incidents. Indicators such as the extent to which the functioning of the service is affected, the duration of an incident or the number of affected recipients of services could play an important role in identifying whether the operational disruption of the service is severe.
- (102) Where essential or important entities become aware of a significant incident, they should be required to submit an early warning without undue delay and in any event within 24 hours. That early warning should be followed by an incident notification. The entities concerned should submit an incident notification without undue delay and in any event  within  72  hours  of  becoming  aware  of  the  significant  incident,  with  the  aim,  in  particular,  of  updating information  submitted  through  the  early  warning  and  indicating  an  initial  assessment  of  the  significant  incident, including  its  severity  and  impact,  as  well  as  indicators  of  compromise,  where  available.  A  final  report  should  be submitted  not  later  than  one  month  after  the  incident  notification.  The  early  warning  should  only  include  the information  necessary  to  make  the  CSIRT,  or  where  applicable  the  competent  authority,  aware  of  the  significant incident and allow the entity concerned to seek assistance, if required. Such early warning, where applicable, should indicate whether the significant incident is suspected of being caused by unlawful or malicious acts, and whether it is likely to have a cross-border impact. Member States should ensure that the obligation to submit that early warning, or  the  subsequent  incident  notification,  does  not  divert  the  notifying  entity's  resources  from  activities  related  to incident handling that should be prioritised, in order to prevent incident reporting obligations from either diverting resources from significant incident response handling or otherwise compromising the entity's efforts in that respect. In the event of an ongoing incident at the time of the submission of the final report, Member States should ensure that entities concerned provide a progress report at that time, and a final report within one month of their handling of the significant incident.
- (103) Where  applicable,  essential  and  important  entities  should  communicate,  without  undue  delay,  to  their  service recipients any measures or remedies that they can take to mitigate the resulting risks from a significant cyber threat. Those entities should, where appropriate and in particular where the significant cyber threat is likely to materialise, also  inform  their  service  recipients  of  the  threat  itself.  The  requirement  to  inform  those  recipients  of  significant cyber  threats  should  be  met  on  a  best  efforts  basis  but  should  not  discharge  those  entities  from  the  obligation  to take, at their own expense, appropriate and immediate measures to prevent or remedy any such threats and restore the  normal  security  level  of  the  service.  The  provision  of  such  information  about  significant  cyber  threats  to  the service recipients should be free of charge and drafted in easily comprehensible language.
- (104) Providers of public electronic communications networks or of publicly available electronic communications services should implement security by design and by default, and inform their service recipients of significant cyber threats and of measures they can take to protect the security of  their  devices and communications, for example by using specific types of software or encryption technologies.
- (105) A proactive approach to cyber threats is a vital component of cybersecurity risk management that should enable the competent  authorities  to  effectively  prevent  cyber threats  from  materialising  into  incidents  that  may  cause considerable  material  or  non-material  damage.  For  that  purpose,  the  notification  of  cyber  threats  is  of  key importance. To that end, entities are encouraged to report on a voluntary basis cyber threats.
- (106) In  order  to  simplify  the  reporting  of  information  required  under  this  Directive  as  well  as  to  decrease  the administrative  burden  for  entities,  Member  States  should  provide  technical  means  such  as  a  single  entry  point, automated  systems,  online  forms,  user-friendly  interfaces,  templates,  dedicated  platforms  for  the  use  of  entities, regardless of whether they fall within the scope of this Directive, for the submission of the relevant information to be reported. Union funding supporting the implementation of this Directive, in particular within the Digital Europe programme,  established  by  Regulation  (EU)  2021/694  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council ( 21 ),  could include  support  for  single  entry  points.  Furthermore,  entities  are  often  in  a  situation  where  a  particular  incident, because of its features, needs to be reported to various authorities as a result of notification obligations included in various  legal  instruments.  Such  cases  create  additional  administrative  burden  and  could  also  lead  to  uncertainties with regard to the format and procedures of such notifications. Where a single entry point is established, Member States are encouraged also to use that single entry point for notifications of security incidents required under other Union  law,  such  as  Regulation  (EU)  2016/679  and  Directive  2002/58/EC.  The  use  of  such  single  entry  point  for reporting  of  security  incidents  under  Regulation  (EU)  2016/679  and  Directive  2002/58/EC  should  not  affect  the application of  the provisions of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and Directive 2002/58/EC, in particular  those relating to  the  independence  of  the  authorities  referred  to  therein.  ENISA,  in  cooperation  with  the  Cooperation  Group, should develop common notification templates by means of guidelines to simplify and streamline the information to be reported under Union law and decrease the administrative burden on notifying entities.
- (107) Where it is suspected that an incident is related to serious criminal activities under Union or national law, Member States  should  encourage  essential  and  important  entities,  on  the  basis  of  applicable  criminal  proceedings  rules  in accordance  with  Union  law,  to  report  incidents  of  a  suspected  serious  criminal  nature  to  the  relevant  law enforcement authorities. Where appropriate, and without prejudice to the personal data protection rules applying to Europol, it is desirable that coordination between the competent authorities and the law enforcement authorities of different Member States be facilitated by the European Cybercrime Centre (EC3) and ENISA.
( 21 ) Regulation  (EU)  2021/694  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  29  April  2021  establishing  the  Digital  Europe Programme and repealing Decision (EU) 2015/2240 (OJ L 166, , p. 1). 
- (108) Personal  data  are  in  many  cases  compromised  as  a  result  of  incidents.  In  that  context,  the  competent  authorities should cooperate and exchange information about all relevant matters with the authorities referred to in Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and Directive 2002/58/EC.
- (109) Maintaining accurate and complete databases of domain name registration data (WHOIS data) and providing lawful access to such data is essential to ensure the security, stability and resilience of the DNS, which in turn contributes to  a  high  common  level  of  cybersecurity  across  the  Union.  For  that  specific  purpose,  TLD  name  registries  and entities providing domain name registration services should be required to process certain data necessary to achieve that purpose. Such processing should constitute a legal obligation within the meaning of Article 6(1), point (c), of Regulation  (EU)  2016/679.  That  obligation  is  without  prejudice  to  the  possibility  to  collect  domain  name registration  data  for  other  purposes,  for  example  on  the  basis  of  contractual  arrangements  or  legal  requirements established  in  other  Union  or  national  law.  That  obligation  aims  to  achieve  a  complete  and  accurate  set  of registration data and should not result in collecting the same data multiple times. The TLD name registries and the entities  providing  domain  name  registration  services  should  cooperate  with  each  other  in  order  to  avoid  the duplication of that task.
- (110) The availability and timely accessibility of domain name registration data to legitimate access seekers is essential for the  prevention  and  combating  of  DNS  abuse,  and  for  the  prevention  and  detection  of  and  response  to  incidents. Legitimate access seekers are to be understood as any natural or legal person making a request pursuant to Union or national  law.  They  can  include  authorities  that  are  competent  under  this  Directive  and  those  that  are  competent under Union or  national law for  the  prevention,  investigation,  detection  or  prosecution  of  criminal  offences,  and CERTs or CSIRTs. TLD name registries and entities providing domain name registration services should be required to  enable  lawful  access  to  specific  domain  name  registration  data,  which  are  necessary  for  the  purposes  of  the access  request,  to  legitimate  access  seekers  in  accordance  with  Union  and  national  law.  The  request  of  legitimate access seekers should be accompanied by a statement of reasons permitting the assessment of the necessity of access to the data.
- (111) In order to ensure the availability of accurate and complete domain name registration data, TLD name registries and entities  providing  domain  name  registration  services  should  collect  and  guarantee  the  integrity  and  availability  of domain name registration data. In particular, TLD name registries and entities providing domain name registration services  should  establish  policies  and  procedures  to  collect  and  maintain  accurate  and  complete  domain  name registration  data,  as  well  as  to  prevent  and  correct  inaccurate  registration  data,  in  accordance  with  Union  data protection  law.  Those  policies  and  procedures  should  take  into  account,  to  the  extent  possible,  the  standards developed by the multi-stakeholder governance structures at international  level.  The  TLD  name  registries  and  the entities  providing  domain  name  registration  services  should  adopt  and  implement  proportionate  procedures  to verify  domain name registration data. Those procedures should reflect the best practices used within the industry and,  to  the  extent  possible,  the  progress  made  in  the  field  of  electronic  identification.  Examples  of  verification procedures may include ex ante controls carried out at the time of the registration and ex post controls carried out after the registration. The TLD name registries and the entities providing domain name registration services should, in particular, verify at least one means of contact of the registrant.
- (112) TLD name registries and entities providing domain name registration services should be required to make publicly available domain name registration data that fall outside the scope of Union data protection law, such as data that concern  legal  persons,  in  line  with  the  preamble  of  Regulation  (EU)  2016/679.  For  legal  persons,  the  TLD  name registries  and  the  entities  providing  domain  name  registration  services  should  make  publicly  available  at  least  the name  of  the  registrant  and  the  contact  telephone  number.  The  contact  email  address  should  also  be  published, provided that it does not contain any personal data, such as in the case of email aliases or functional accounts. TLD name registries and entities providing domain name registration services should also enable lawful access to specific domain name registration data concerning natural persons to legitimate access seekers, in accordance with Union data  protection  law.  Member  States  should  require  TLD  name  registries  and  entities  providing  domain  name registration services to respond without undue delay to requests for the disclosure of domain name registration data from legitimate access seekers. TLD name registries and entities providing domain name registration services should establish  policies  and  procedures  for  the  publication  and  disclosure  of  registration  data,  including  service  level agreements  to  deal  with  requests  for  access  from  legitimate  access  seekers.  Those  policies  and  procedures  should take  into  account,  to  the  extent  possible,  any  guidance  and  the  standards  developed  by  the  multi-stakeholder governance  structures  at  international  level.  The  access  procedure  could  include  the  use  of  an  interface,  portal  or other  technical  tool  to  provide  an  efficient  system  for  requesting  and  accessing  registration  data.  With  a  view  to promoting  harmonised  practices  across  the  internal  market,  the  Commission  can,  without  prejudice  to  the competences of the European Data Protection Board, provide guidelines with regard to such procedures, which take into  account,  to  the  extent  possible,  the  standards  developed  by  the  multi-stakeholder  governance  structures  at international level. Member States should ensure that all types of access to personal and non-personal domain name registration data are free of charge.
- (113) Entities falling within the scope of this Directive should be considered to fall under the jurisdiction of the Member State in which they are established. However, providers of public electronic communications networks or providers of  publicly  available  electronic  communications services should be considered to fall under  the jurisdiction of  the Member State in which they provide their services. DNS service providers, TLD name registries, entities providing domain  name  registration  services,  cloud  computing  service  providers,  data  centre  service  providers,  content delivery network providers, managed service providers, managed security service providers, as well as providers of online marketplaces, of online search engines and of social networking services platforms should be considered to fall  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Member  State  in  which  they  have  their  main  establishment  in  the  Union.  Public administration entities should fall under  the jurisdiction of  the Member State which established them. If the entity provides services or is established in more than one Member State, it should fall under the separate and concurrent jurisdiction  of each of  those Member States. The competent authorities of  those Member States should cooperate, provide mutual assistance to each other and, where appropriate, carry out joint supervisory actions. Where Member States exercise jurisdiction, they should not impose enforcement measures or penalties more than once for the same conduct, in line with the principle of ne bis in idem .
- (114) In  order  to  take  account of  the  cross-border  nature  of  the  services  and  operations  of  DNS  service  providers,  TLD name  registries,  entities  providing  domain  name  registration  services,  cloud  computing  service  providers,  data centre service providers, content delivery network providers, managed service providers, managed security service providers,  as  well  as  providers  of  online  marketplaces,  of online  search  engines  and  of  social  networking  services platforms, only one Member State should have jurisdiction over those entities. Jurisdiction should be attributed to the  Member  State  in  which  the  entity  concerned  has  its  main  establishment  in  the  Union.  The  criterion  of establishment for the purposes of this Directive implies the effective exercise of activity through stable arrangements.  The  legal  form  of  such  arrangements,  whether  through  a  branch  or  a  subsidiary  with  a  legal personality,  is  not  the  determining  factor  in  that  respect.  Whether  that  criterion  is  fulfilled  should  not  depend  on whether the network and information systems are physically located in a given place; the presence and use of such systems  do  not,  in  themselves,  constitute  such  main  establishment  and  are  therefore  not  decisive  criteria  for determining  the  main  establishment.  The  main  establishment  should  be  considered  to  be  in  the  Member  State where the decisions related to the cybersecurity risk-management measures are predominantly taken in the Union. This  will  typically  correspond  to  the  place  of  the  entities'  central  administration  in  the  Union.  If  such  a  Member State  cannot  be  determined  or  if  such  decisions  are  not  taken  in  the  Union,  the  main  establishment  should  be considered to be in the Member State where cybersecurity operations are carried out. If such a Member State cannot be  determined,  the  main  establishment  should  be  considered  to  be  in  the  Member  State  where  the  entity  has  the establishment with the highest number of employees in the Union. Where the services are carried out by a group of undertakings,  the  main  establishment  of  the  controlling  undertaking  should  be  considered  to  be  the  main establishment of the group of undertakings.
- (115) Where a  publicly  available  recursive  DNS  service  is  provided  by  a  provider  of  public  electronic  communications networks or of publicly available electronic communications services only as a part of  the internet  access service, the entity should be considered to fall under the jurisdiction of all the Member States where its services are provided. - (116) Where a DNS service provider, a TLD name registry, an entity providing domain name registration services, a cloud computing service provider, a data centre service provider, a content delivery network provider, a managed service provider, a managed security service provider or a provider of an online marketplace, of an online search engine or of a social networking services platform, which is not established in the Union, offers services within the Union, it should  designate  a  representative  in  the  Union.  In  order  to  determine  whether  such  an  entity  is  offering  services within the Union, it should be ascertained whether the entity is planning to offer services to persons in one or more Member States. The mere accessibility in the Union of the entity's or an intermediary's website or of an email address or other contact details, or the use of a language generally used in the third country where the entity is established, should be considered to be insufficient to ascertain such an intention. However, factors such as the use of a language or a currency generally used in one or more Member States with the possibility of ordering services in that language, or the mentioning of customers or users who are in the Union, could make it apparent that the entity is planning to offer services within the Union. The representative should act on behalf of the entity and it should be possible for the competent authorities or the CSIRTs to address the representative. The representative should be explicitly designated by a written mandate of the entity to act on the latter's behalf with regard to the latter's obligations laid down in this Directive, including incident reporting.
- (117) In order to ensure a clear overview of DNS service providers, TLD name registries, entities providing domain name registration  services,  cloud  computing  service  providers,  data  centre  service  providers,  content  delivery  network providers, managed  service providers, managed  security  service providers, as well as providers of online marketplaces, of online search engines and of social networking services platforms, which provide services across the Union that fall within the scope of this Directive, ENISA should create and maintain a registry of such entities, based  on  the  information  received  by  Member  States,  where  applicable  through  national  mechanisms  established for  entities  to  register  themselves.  The  single  points  of  contact  should  forward  to ENISA the  information  and  any changes thereto. With a view to ensuring the accuracy and completeness of the information that is to be included in that  registry,  Member  States  can  submit  to  ENISA  the  information  available  in  any  national  registries  on  those entities. ENISA and the Member States should take measures to facilitate the interoperability of such registries, while ensuring  protection  of  confidential  or  classified  information.  ENISA  should  establish  appropriate  information classification  and  management  protocols  to  ensure  the  security  and  confidentiality  of  disclosed  information  and restrict the access, storage, and transmission of such information to intended users.
- (118) Where information which is classified in accordance with Union or national law is exchanged, reported or otherwise shared under this Directive, the corresponding rules on the handling of classified information should be applied. In addition,  ENISA  should  have  the  infrastructure,  procedures  and  rules  in  place  to  handle  sensitive  and  classified information in accordance with the applicable security rules for protecting EU classified information.
- (119) With cyber threats becoming more complex and sophisticated, good detection of such threats and their prevention measures  depend  to  a  large  extent  on  regular  threat  and  vulnerability  intelligence  sharing  between  entities. Information  sharing  contributes  to  an  increased  awareness  of  cyber  threats,  which,  in  turn,  enhances  entities' capacity to prevent such threats from materialising into incidents and enables entities to better contain the effects of incidents  and  recover  more  efficiently.  In  the  absence  of  guidance  at  Union  level,  various  factors  seem  to  have inhibited  such  intelligence  sharing,  in  particular  uncertainty  over  the  compatibility  with  competition  and  liability rules.
- (120) Entities should be encouraged and assisted by Member States to collectively leverage their individual knowledge and practical  experience  at  strategic,  tactical  and  operational  levels  with  a  view  to  enhancing  their  capabilities  to adequately prevent, detect, respond to or recover from incidents or to mitigate their impact. It is thus necessary to enable  the  emergence  at  Union  level  of  voluntary  cybersecurity  information-sharing  arrangements.  To  that  end, Member  States  should  actively  assist  and  encourage  entities,  such  as  those  providing  cybersecurity  services  and research, as well as relevant entities not falling within the scope of this Directive, to participate in such cybersecurity information-sharing  arrangements.  